This page explains what we mean by an "alpha test".

==What's an Alpha?==

If you've never tested an alpha release before, then there are a few important things to know:

*'''It runs, but it will have range of problems.'''
*'''Some parts of the design are still missing.'''
*'''The final design is not cast in stone.'''
*'''It's better to get it out now rather than wait.'''

How well does the Alpha run? We know we can read files, run scripts, read/write TCP networks, and quite a lot more. However, it is not stable enough yet for any serious applications, or even most of other scripts.

Also, it is important to know:

*'''The alpha has no security checking or sandbox yet.'''
*'''It is running with module-mode disabled (global context).'''
*'''Do not use it for running any real applications.'''
*'''It is capable of corrupting or destroying data.''' So don't use it to write important files.

==Focus of Testing==

During alpha testing stages, it is really important to focus on specific parts of the systems. '''This is described and managed by a separate document, [[R3 Alpha Test Priorities]].''' We will update this as we make progress, so please read it.

==Bug Reporting==

'''You have been invited to use the alpha release because we need your help and input.
'''

As an alpha tester, we ask that you keep a careful watch for bugs. When you find a bug, there is a natural tendency of good coders to work around it, but please don't. Tell us about the bug so we can fix it. We know that takes time and effort, but we need that information.

As you get started, you're going to find dozens of problems and bugs. But, recognize that not all bugs are equal. Some bugs are show-stoppers that need to get fixed immediately (within hours). Other bugs can be noted and addressed later.