(Description needed here)

===Standard Options===

====/INTO buffer - Have series builder functions act like INSERT (original proposal)====

Builder functions create a new series based on a spec and/or a template. This allows the template to be reusable, but adds series creation overhead. Because of this, when optimizing many builder functions tend to get replaced with a buffer and several chained modifier functions, usually variants of INSERT.

The /INTO option would provide a buffer that the builder would build into, instead of creating a new series. This buffer could then be reused, added to and so on, leading to much lower overhead. Another advantage would be to specify a buffer of another datatype than the template, saving conversion overhead. /INTO would be an option for advanced users when optimizing, and could reduce the overhead of mezzanine and library functions.

INSERT semantics are used instead of APPEND semantics because it is more general. You can recreate APPEND with INSERT by wrapping it in a couple functions (HEAD and TAIL), but you can't create INSERT with APPEND without an additional buffer. Most /INTO uses will be to insert at the tail of a cleared buffer, but not all. It may be possible to have /ONTO for append.

Behavior with /INTO:

* The generated series data is inserted into the buffer at the position specified by the buffer reference, rather than a new series.

* The buffer is returned at the position after the inserted series data, rather than the head of the new series. This is critical for chaining.

Since you already have a reference to the buffer's insert position (you passed it), and you can get the HEAD and TAIL positions, the only position you can't know without it being returned is the position after the insert. This is why INSERT and CHANGE return that position, and why /INTO does.

Examples (as of the current REBOL versions): 

* Has /INTO: 
** [http://curecode.org/rebol3/ticket.rsp?id=506 REDUCE] (in R3 only)
** [http://curecode.org/rebol3/ticket.rsp?id=506 COMPOSE] (in R3 only)
** [http://curecode.org/rebol3/ticket.rsp?id=621 COLLECT]
** [http://curecode.org/rebol3/ticket.rsp?id=620 EXTRACT]
** REWORD (work in process)
* Could use /INTO:
** (RE)MOLD
** (RE)FORM
** [http://curecode.org/rebol3/ticket.rsp?id=623 READ]
** [http://curecode.org/rebol3/ticket.rsp?id=709 MAP-EACH]
* Don't add /INTO: 
** JOIN
** REJOIN (use INSERT)
** ARRAY (use INSERT/DUP)
* Uses /INTO differently:
** SPLIT (work in process)

The low-level TO-* functions and MAKE don't need /INTO. Modifying functions like CHANGE and REPLACE already insert, no option needed.