For bug reports and enhancement requests.

==Summary==

For 3.0 bug reporting and enhancement requests we use '''CureCode''', written and hosted by [http://softinnov.org/ Softinnov].

The web site interface can be found at http://curecode.org/rebol3/

==Basics==

It's pretty obvious when you look at it.

'''No account is needed''' to view and search tickets.

'''To submit or change a ticket requires an account.''' But, it is easy and fast [http://curecode.org/rebol3/register.rsp to register] (also via the link at the top of the page.)

You can also modify the state of tickets that you've submitted earlier.

==Questions==

*Q:
**Does it have a REBOL interface?
**Although it runs in REBOL via the Cheyenne web server, there is currently no direct REBOL interface, but there are plans to add it later.
*Q:
**Can it be enhanced?
**Several enhancements have already been made, and you can submit your suggestions to Softinnov. In addition, the source code is available, so you can help with bugs and enhancements.

==API documentation==
&lt;blockquote&gt;
''Main features :''
* ''retrieve a list of tickets based on preset filters''
* ''retrieve whole details about a given ticket ID''
* ''returned data are in REBOL format (XML support pending)''
* ''doesn't support yet adding or modifying tickets''

''The current API should be considered alpha.''
&lt;/blockquote&gt;

===Query format===

CureCode API URLs must be in the following format:
&lt;pre&gt;
    http&amp;#58;//curecode.org/rebol3/api.rsp?&lt;parameter 1&gt;&amp;&lt;parameter 2&gt;&amp;&lt;parameter n&gt; 
&lt;/pre&gt;
Parameters are separated using the ampersand character (&amp;). You can specify as many parameters as you like, in any order. Parameters can be passed in URL or as POST data.

===Response format===

All responses are encapsulated using the following format :
&lt;pre&gt;
    [&lt;status&gt; &lt;data&gt;]
&lt;/pre&gt;	
&lt;span style=&quot;color:green&quot;&gt;'''&lt;tt&gt;&lt;status&gt;&lt;/tt&gt;'''&lt;/span&gt; is a ''word!'' value informing about the completion of the request :
&lt;blockquote&gt;
* '''&lt;tt&gt;ok&lt;/tt&gt;''' : valid request, &lt;span style=&quot;color:green&quot;&gt;'''&lt;tt&gt;&lt;data&gt;&lt;/tt&gt;'''&lt;/span&gt; can be a ''block!'' or ''integer!'' value.
* '''&lt;tt&gt;error&lt;/tt&gt;''' : invalid request, &lt;span style=&quot;color:green&quot;&gt;'''&lt;tt&gt;&lt;data&gt;&lt;/tt&gt;'''&lt;/span&gt; will be a ''string!'' containing an error message.

&lt;pre&gt;
    [ok 492]
    [ok [403 202 404]]
    [ok [summary: &quot;Crash calling BROWSE function&quot; description:...]]

    [error &quot;FILTER argument is invalid&quot;]
&lt;/pre&gt;
You can use LOAD to query the remote API and get REBOL data back. If you don't trust the server, you can use LOAD/ALL or READ instead.
&lt;pre&gt;
    &gt;&gt; load http://curecode.org/rebol3/api.rsp?type=list&amp;filter=2&amp;mode=count
    == [ok 492]

    &gt;&gt; read http://curecode.org/rebol3/api.rsp?type=list&amp;filter=2&amp;mode=count
    == &quot;[ok 492]&quot;
&lt;/pre&gt;
&lt;/blockquote&gt;

===Get tickets list===

Returns a list of tickets ID matching the selected filter. Optional parameters can be specified to control paging and/or retrieve additional informations.


'''Required parameters'''

*&lt;tt&gt;type=list&lt;/tt&gt;
*&lt;tt&gt;filter=&lt;span style=&quot;color:green&quot;&gt;'''&lt;preset&gt;'''&lt;/span&gt;&lt;/tt&gt;

&lt;blockquote&gt;
&lt;span style=&quot;color:green&quot;&gt;'''&lt;tt&gt;&lt;preset&gt;&lt;/tt&gt;'''&lt;/span&gt; is an integer index value for one of the preset filters:

*&lt;tt&gt;2&lt;/tt&gt; : Most Recent Reports
*&lt;tt&gt;3&lt;/tt&gt; : Unreviewed Submissions
*&lt;tt&gt;4&lt;/tt&gt; : Active Priorities
*&lt;tt&gt;5&lt;/tt&gt; : Tested
*&lt;tt&gt;6&lt;/tt&gt; : Recent Changes
*&lt;tt&gt;7&lt;/tt&gt; : Worst Severit
*&lt;tt&gt;8&lt;/tt&gt; : By Submitter
*&lt;tt&gt;9&lt;/tt&gt; : Completed


&lt;pre&gt;
    &gt;&gt; load http://curecode.org/rebol3/api.rsp?type=list&amp;filter=2
    == [ok [
        507
        506
        505
        504
        ...
&lt;/pre&gt;
&lt;/blockquote&gt;

'''Optional parameters'''

*&lt;tt&gt;mode=&lt;span style=&quot;color:green&quot;&gt;'''&lt;kind&gt;'''&lt;/span&gt;&lt;/tt&gt;

&lt;blockquote&gt;
&lt;span style=&quot;color:green&quot;&gt;'''&lt;tt&gt;&lt;kind&gt;&lt;/tt&gt;'''&lt;/span&gt; is a word switching between different modes of information:

*&lt;tt&gt;count&lt;/tt&gt; : returns only the number of tickets matching the query (''integer!'' value).

*&lt;tt&gt;brief&lt;/tt&gt; : returns a few additionnal info for each ticket (''block!'' of tickets).


&lt;pre&gt;
    &gt;&gt; load http://curecode.org/rebol3/api.rsp?type=list&amp;filter=2&amp;mode=count
    == [ok 492]
    
    &gt;&gt; load http://curecode.org/rebol3/api.rsp?type=list&amp;filter=2&amp;mode=brief
    == [ok [
          [507 1 &quot;Bug&quot; &quot;minor&quot; &quot;submitted&quot; 12-Apr-2009/1:08:18 &quot;test&quot; 1 5 &quot;normal&quot;]
          [506 0 &quot;Wish&quot; &quot;trivial&quot; &quot;submitted&quot; 30-Nov-2008/17:16:43 ...
&lt;/pre&gt;

'''''Note 1''''': ''The &lt;tt&gt;brief&lt;/tt&gt; mode returns a few extra info that may be removed in future versions, like at position 8 the internal status ID and at position 9, the internal severity ID.''

'''''Note 2''''': ''The &lt;tt&gt;count&lt;/tt&gt; mode main usage is to allow paging preparation for long lists.''
&lt;/blockquote&gt;

*&lt;tt&gt;range=&lt;span style=&quot;color:green&quot;&gt;'''&lt;part&gt;'''&lt;/span&gt;&lt;/tt&gt;

&lt;blockquote&gt;
&lt;span style=&quot;color:green&quot;&gt;'''&lt;tt&gt;&lt;part&gt;&lt;/tt&gt;'''&lt;/span&gt; parameter is a ''pair!'' value defining a sub-list. First value indicates the lower bound (&gt;=1) and the second one the upper bound value.


&lt;pre&gt;
    &gt;&gt; load http://curecode.org/rebol3/api.rsp?type=list&amp;filter=2&amp;range=2x5
    == [ok [
    	506
    	505
    	504
    	503
    ]]
    
    &gt;&gt; load http://curecode.org/rebol3/api.rsp?type=list&amp;filter=2&amp;mode=brief&amp;range=1x1
    == [ok [
    	[507 1 &quot;Bug&quot; &quot;minor&quot; &quot;submitted&quot; 12-Apr-2009/1:08:18 &quot;test&quot; 1 5 &quot;normal&quot;]
    ]]
&lt;/pre&gt;

'''''Note''''': ''A query like'' &lt;span style=&quot;color:green&quot;&gt;'''&lt;tt&gt;type=list&amp;filter=1&amp;range=1x1&lt;/tt&gt;'''&lt;/span&gt; ''will give you the last submitted ticket. This can be use in a native client for notifying user when a new ticket is posted.''
&lt;/blockquote&gt;

===Get ticket data===

Returns ticket detailed informations. Optional parameters can be specified to get comments and history.


'''Required parameters'''

*&lt;tt&gt;type=ticket&lt;/tt&gt;
*&lt;tt&gt;id=&lt;span style=&quot;color:green&quot;&gt;'''&lt;ticket-id&gt;'''&lt;/span&gt;&lt;/tt&gt;

&lt;blockquote&gt;
&lt;span style=&quot;color:green&quot;&gt;'''&lt;tt&gt;&lt;ticket-id&gt;&lt;/tt&gt;'''&lt;/span&gt; is a unique ''integer!'' value referencing the ticket on the server. You can get it typically from a ticket list query (see above).


&lt;pre&gt;
    &gt;&gt; load http://curecode.org/rebol3/api.rsp?type=ticket&amp;id=507
    == [ok [
        summary: &quot;test&quot;
        description: &quot;test&quot;
        code: none
        version: &quot;2.100.15&quot;
        severity: &quot;minor&quot;
        status: &quot;submitted&quot;
        resolution: &quot;open&quot;
        priority: &quot;normal&quot;
        type: &quot;Bug&quot;
        platform: &quot;All&quot;
        created: 27-Jan-2009/10:28:24
        modified: 12-Apr-2009/1:08:18
        user: &quot;admin&quot;
        category: &quot;n/a&quot;
        reproduce: &quot;Always&quot;
        fixed-in: none
        project: &quot;AltME&quot;
        comments: none
        history: none
    ]]
&lt;/pre&gt;

'''''Note''''': ''By default, &lt;tt&gt;comments&lt;/tt&gt; and &lt;tt&gt;history&lt;/tt&gt; are always none.''
&lt;/blockquote&gt;

'''Optional parameters'''

*&lt;tt&gt;show=&lt;span style=&quot;color:green&quot;&gt;'''&lt;level&gt;'''&lt;/span&gt;&lt;/tt&gt;

&lt;blockquote&gt;
&lt;span style=&quot;color:green&quot;&gt;'''&lt;tt&gt;&lt;level&gt;&lt;/tt&gt;'''&lt;/span&gt; is a ''word!'' value allowing to expand the ticket with additional informations. Allowed values are :

*&lt;tt&gt;comments&lt;/tt&gt; : provides all the comments attached to the requested ticket.
*&lt;tt&gt;history&lt;/tt&gt; : provides the whole history of the requested ticket.
*&lt;tt&gt;all&lt;/tt&gt; : combines the two other options (comments+history).


&lt;pre&gt;
    &gt;&gt; load http://curecode.org/rebol3/api.rsp?type=ticket&amp;id=507&amp;show=all
    == [ok [
        summary: &quot;test&quot;
        description: &quot;test&quot;
        code: none
        version: &quot;2.100.15&quot;
        severity: &quot;minor&quot;
        status: &quot;submitted&quot;
        resolution: &quot;open&quot;
        priority: &quot;normal&quot;
        type: &quot;Bug&quot;
        platform: &quot;All&quot;
        created: 27-Jan-2009/10:28:24
        modified: 12-Apr-2009/1:08:18
        user: &quot;admin&quot;
        category: &quot;n/a&quot;
        reproduce: &quot;Always&quot;
        fixed-in: none
        project: &quot;AltME&quot;
        comments: [
            [1 &quot;admin&quot; 12-Apr-2009/1:08:18 &quot;yes we can!&quot;]
        ]
        history: [
            [12-Apr-2009/1:08:18 &quot;admin&quot; &quot;Comment : 0000001&quot; &quot;Added&quot; &quot;-&quot;]
            [27-Jan-2009/10:28:24 &quot;admin&quot; &quot;Ticket &quot; &quot;Added&quot; &quot;-&quot;]
        ]
    ]]
&lt;/pre&gt;
&lt;/blockquote&gt;

==Change Log==

'''CureCode 0.9.12 - 13/12/2010''' :

*FEAT: Added the ability to move tickets between projects.
*FEAT: New search field: &quot;User&quot;.
*FEAT: New isolated search field: &quot;Commented by&quot;.
*FEAT: RSS feeds added for notifications of projects &amp; tickets changes.
*FEAT: Added short URLs for tickets direct referencing.
	
*FIX: Double line breaks in PRE tags in comments removed.
*FIX: Stats bar graphs were never displaying per-project stats.
*FIX: Double escaping of HTML entities in description and comments removed.

'''CureCode 0.9.11 - 20/02/2010''' :

*FEAT: Custom captcha system replaced by ReCaptcha.
*FEAT: Auto-adjusting scale for bar charts in stats (more accurate and readable).
*FEAT: Category selector added in tickets list detailed view
*FEAT: Empty attached file section not shown anymore in tickets read-only view.
	
*FIX: When clicked, attached files will now show up in browser's window by default.
*FIX: When attaching file in a new ticket, the returned attached filename was 'none'.

'''CureCode 0.9.10 - 17/01/2009''' :

*FEAT: Ticket's attached files management added.
	
*FIX: Default query parameters corruption for anonymous users fixed.
*FIX: Issue #1371 regarding policy for ticket deletion by owner.
*FIX: Dimissed ticket can't be changed by the owner anymore.
*FIX: Ordering not working properly for all filters and columns.
*FIX: Minor missing translations for french catalog.

*LOOK: Added Henrik's 33% fix for page header.
*LOOK: &quot;Example code&quot; field now use PRE tag for better rendering of source code.

'''CureCode 0.9.9 - 26/07/2009''' :

*FEAT: Prefered filters and project can now be user-defined.
*FEAT: Categories order can now be set by admin.
	
*FIX:  Stats charts are now correct.
*FIX:  Default filter in anonymous mode works now correctly.
*FIX:  Switched from HTML quirk mode to correct doctype.
	
*LOOK: Fixed borders issues in CSS (except for IE8)

'''CureCode 0.9.8 - 26/05/2009''' :

*FEAT: &quot;User&quot; column added to tickets list page.
*FEAT: Search text feature extended to comments.
*FEAT: &quot;Main&quot; page now populated with statistics.
*FEAT: New Preset filter: &quot;My Reports&quot; (default when logged)
	
*FIX:  &quot;By Submitter&quot; filter now working correctly.
*FIX:  Redirection issues with Chrome fixed.
*FIX:  In Preset mode, columns sorting links removed.
	
*LOOK: Textarea edit fields now enlarged to maximum width.

'''CureCode 0.9.7 - 11/04/2009''' :

*FEAT: Dismissed tickets are now filtered out from &quot;Active Priorities&quot; and &quot;Worst Severity&quot; filters.
*FEAT: Current project name added to &quot;Add Ticket&quot; form.
*FEAT: Reversed sort order for Versions and Categories lists in admin page.
*FEAT: Added an experimental API for getting tickets in REBOL format.

*FIX:	Front page stats now count &quot;dismissed&quot; tickets as closed.
*FIX:	Message &quot;n ticket(s) found&quot; fixed for localization, now translates correctly in french.

'''CureCode 0.9.6 - 21/01/2009''' :

*FEAT: Ticket submitter can now delete his ticket.
*FEAT: Admin can now delete any ticket.
*FEAT: Admin can now delete a user.
*FEAT: Admin can now change user's role.
*FEAT: Admin can now force validation of a new user's account.
	
*FIX:	Tickets list loading twice on first visit issue fixed.
	
*LOOK: Input fields and buttons border width reduced to 1 pixel.

'''Migration Changelog''':
*&quot;Response&quot; AltME Tracker field now mapped to a comment in CC (keeping the original response's date) rather than using the &quot;Code Example&quot; field.
*There's no more data to migrate to CC from AltME, so the migration is considered finished (meaning that old tickets can now be changed safely in CC).

'''CureCode 0.9.5 - 05/12/2008''' :

*FEAT: Added Preset ticket list filters (from AltME Tracker)
*FEAT: Added search ticket by text feature
*FEAT: Added direct access to a ticket knowing its ID
*FEAT: Filter zone in tickets list page redesigned to account for different filtering modes.
*FEAT: Back and forward navigation now possible from inside a ticket.
*FEAT: Ticket's ID in descriptions and comments now displayed as links.
	
*FIX:  Parsing URL in description/comments section will now stop on #&quot;&lt;&quot;.
*FIX:  CSS fixed for tables border rendering on non-IE browser.
*FIX:  Case-only changes in ticket's title are now possible.
	
*LOOK: Minor positionning enhancements of login block in home page.
*LOOK: &quot;Description&quot; and &quot;Code example&quot; sections default height reduced.

'''Migration Changelog''':

*Ticket submitting users are now migrated too
*Target projects list reduced to only one : &quot;REBOL 3.0&quot;
*Fixed wrong tickets ID passed to 'add-log (for proper ticket's logs)

'''CureCode 0.9.4 Changelog''':

*When session times out, user is redirected to login page.
*Fixed the &quot;Developer&quot; access right level issues.
*Admin/Developer users enter Ticket pages in edit mode directly.
*Once logged in, users start at the ticket page list directly.
*Several minor bug fixes

'''Todo-List (by priority)''' :

#&quot;View Tickets&quot; custom and persistent filters (can survive to RSP sessions).
#API for external access :
#*allow ticket submission
#*add support for XML output
#Make the &quot;Assigned to&quot; field editable
#REBOL code formatting in code section 
#Option for being permanently logged (permanent session cookie).
#In &quot;All Projects&quot; view, there should be a &quot;Project&quot; column.
#Improve the UI of the home page when logged.

'''Tasks done'''

#Define a backup procedure and find a backup server.
#Navigation buttons in Ticket page to walk back and forth in a filtered view.
#Add admin features :
#*Delete a project
#*Delete a user
#*Change user's role
#API for external access :
#*formats: REBOL, XML
#*access: simple HTTP API, REST
#Add an intro text + usage docs on home page for newcomers.



----
{{Template:Community_TOC}}
[[Category:Community]]

==Related Links==