{{underconstruction}}
This page specifies how function arguments are defined.

==General Form==

When defining a function, its ''formal arguments'' are specified by a block of the form:

 [arg [datatypes] &quot;comment&quot; ...]

The ''arg'' is a word that provides the name of the argument. It can be one of several word possibilities, as listed below.

The ''datatypes'' specification block is optional. When not given, any datatype except UNSET! will be accepted. When provided, one or more datatypes can be specified in the block. Only valid datatype values (such as integer!) and typesets (such as series!) are allowed.

The ''comment'' is a string that describes the details about the argument. These comments help make your functions auto-documenting for HELP and other development tools.

==Word Variations==

The argument word can be specified as:

*'''word''' - pass the evaluated argument value in all cases
*''''word''' - pass unevaluated words and paths (see details below)
*''':word''' - pass the value as-is, no evaluation is done
*'''word:''' - define special function attributes (pending implementation)
*'''/word''' - allow refinement to function

For the 'word case above, the actual argument will determine how it is processed. These choices are supported:

*'''arg''' - pass the word, unevaluated.
*''':arg''' - pass the value of the word
*''''arg''' - pass the literal word as is
*'''arg/path''' - pass the path, unevaluated.
*''':arg/path''' - pass the path's value
*'''(expr)''' - evaluate and pass results.

For the :word case above, the actual argument does not matter. The next value in the input stream will be used, regardless of type.

Note that both 'word and :word will accept unset! values only if those are specified as valid datatypes. For example:

 sample: func [:arg [any-type!]] [probe :arg]
 sample 10
 10
 do [sample]
 unset!

Or, you can explicitly specify that unset! is allowed as a value:

 sample: func [:arg [integer! unset!]] [probe :arg]

To help show how it works, here are examples of arg as a 'word. These are all true expressions.

&lt;pre&gt;
; Arg as 'word:
f: func ['arg] [:arg]
1 = f 1
'word = f word
'path/word = f path/word
2 = f (1 + 1)
n: 3  3 = f :n

; Allows unset value:
f: func ['arg [integer! unset!]] [:arg]
do [unset? f]
&lt;/pre&gt;

And, here are examples of arg as a :word. These are all true expressions.

&lt;pre&gt;
; Arg as :word:
f: func [:arg] [:arg]
1 = f 1
word? f word
'path/word = f path/word
paren? f (1 + 1)
get-word? f :n

; Allows unset value:
f: func [:arg [integer! unset!]] [:arg]
do [unset? f]
&lt;/pre&gt;

==Pending==

get and set on words and paths