'''This page has been created to post my specific high-level notes about the GUI.''' I will try my best to keep it updated as we move forward. --Carl

==Main Note==

The GUI works. The primary design achieves most of my goals, although it still has some rough edges. 

'''Keep in mind you are using an ''alpha''''' -- which means it will have some problems and will even crash at times. Some of these problems we know about, others we don't.

Also, if you are using variations of the GUI done by anyone but me, ''they are experimental prototypes''' and may have other problems. They may also contain concepts that may or may not be in the final design, since they still have to pass the Carl filter.

So, my advice in general is, '''not to worry'''. We will fix everything. We are committed to this being a powerful but easy-to-use GUI.

==Important to Know==

Over the years, I've learned that I need to make this clear:

&lt;blockquote&gt;
'''If part of the system does not seem to work right, let us know! Do not assume that it must remain that way.'''
&lt;/blockquote&gt;

For example, we still have some problems with resizing various panels. Part of this is from incorrect default settings for styles. Maybe its min-size or max-size is not correct. Other problems may be from bugs. But, if it looks wrong, assume that it is wrong.

Now, if you point to a problem, and we don't think it's a problem, that means either:

#We did not document it well enough.
#You did not read part that documentation.
#We disagree on the design.

The first two are easy to fix. The third may require that we talk about it. It is likely we have different goals. Discussion is required.

==Contributions==

Right now, we are focused on the [[R3 GUI]], and we can use your help.

For example, people like Henrik have jumped in and offered many good features and added nice artistic elements. We are thankful for that, and want to get more people involved.

Please read '''[[Source Code Contributions]]'''.