'''Include''' is a REBOL script processor. It is implemented as a function and works as a REBOL script loader, preprocessor and evaluator. It is not an &quot;alternative module system&quot;, in fact, it is orthogonal to any such system, meaning that it can work together with such a system.

==Design features==

# A comfortable REBOL script evaluator:
## Can preprocess and evaluate any script (the script does not have to contain '''prebol''' directives).
## Processes '''prebol''' directives facilitating SDK debugging.
## During preprocessing errors are enhanced to inform in which file the error occurred to make debugging more comfortable.
## Uses '''include-ctx/path''' which resembles paths of many operating systems to search for scripts.
## '''include-ctx/path''' can contain URLs, not just local directories.
## '''include/check''' prevents scripts from being re-included (included more than once).
## Processes ordinary scripts with REBOL header.
## Processes prefaced REBOL scripts, i.e., REBOL scripts with preface preceding REBOL header and embedded REBOL scripts (see [http://www.rebol.com/docs/core23/rebolcore-5.html#section-1.2]).
# An improved script loader:
## '''include/only''' just loads and preprocesses a script yielding a REBOL block.
## '''include/link''' loads a script, preprocesses it and saves the result to the specified file.
# An improved preprocessor:
## Processes all '''prebol''' directives and is compatible with SDK.
## The #include-check directive is available as a &quot;don't re-include&quot; variant of the #include directive.
## It is possible to include small parts of scripts like binary data, images or strings.
## Context encapsulation is available using the &lt;code&gt;make object!&lt;/code&gt; or the &lt;code&gt;make module!&lt;/code&gt; method.
## Users can define new directives.

==License==

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the &quot;License&quot;). You may obtain a copy of the License at

		http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

==Description==

The preprocessing phase is used to build the script, i.e., to include the necessary parts. Moreover, it enables the user to evaluate any REBOL expression(s).

===Standard preprocessing directives===

====&lt;code&gt;#include script&lt;/code&gt;====

Include a script (a file or URL) here. The script is preprocessed by '''include'''.

====&lt;code&gt;#include-check script&lt;/code&gt;====

The same as above, except that the script is not included if present in the '''include-ctx/log'''.

====&lt;code&gt;#do block&lt;/code&gt;====

Do the given code block during preprocessing including the result here without preprocessing it further.

====&lt;code&gt;#include-string text-file&lt;/code&gt;====

Include the given '''text-file''' as a string.

====&lt;code&gt;#include-binary binary-file&lt;/code&gt;====

Include the given '''binary-file''' as a binary.

====&lt;code&gt;#include-files dir file-list&lt;/code&gt;====

Include the files from the '''file-list''' looking for them in the given '''dir''' directory. The files are included as a block containing name and the binary contents of all files.

====&lt;code&gt;COMMENT&lt;/code&gt;====

Leave out the COMMENT directive and its argument from the code. The comment is not left out if the '''''keep-comments''''' global variable is defined when the directive is processed.

===Conditional preprocessing directives===

====&lt;code&gt;#if cond-block true-block&lt;/code&gt;====

Conditionally include the given '''then-block''' if the '''cond-block''' evaluates '''true'''. The '''then-block''' is preprocessed when included.

====&lt;code&gt;#either cond-block true-block false-block&lt;/code&gt;====

Conditionally include one of the two blocks depending on the result of evaluation of the given '''cond-block'''. The block being included is preprocessed.

===Global words used===

===='''''include'''''====

The '''''include''''' word refers to the '''include''' function.

===='''''include-ctx'''''====

The '''''include-ctx''''' word refers to the object containing important '''include''' variables and helper functions.

===='''''script?'''''====

The implementation patches the '''''script?''''' function when needed.

===INCLUDE-CTX variables===

===='''''path'''''====

The '''''path''''' word refers to a block containing the paths where the '''include''' function shall look for the files.

If the script file to include is specified with a non-empty path the script file is looked up only at its path. As opposed to that when the script file is specified without any path using only a file name '''include''' will use the '''include-ctx/path''' to look for the file.

The '''path''' can be modified/set by users. See also the '''include-ctx/push''' and '''include-ctx/pop''' helper functions.

=====Prioritization=====

The directories (or URLs) that are first in the '''include-path''' are searched first. Consequently they are having priority during the file search.

===='''''log'''''====

The '''''log''''' variable refers to a block containing the files (with complete paths) '''include''' function processed. It is used by the &lt;code&gt;/check&lt;/code&gt; refinement and by the &lt;code&gt;#include-check&lt;/code&gt; directive to check whether a specific file was already included. The default REBOL comparison (which is case-insensitive) is used and the paths are converted to lowercase.

The user can save the '''log''' to a file to create a log file. The user can influence what will be considered as &quot;already included&quot;, typically by clearing the contents of the '''log''' block when starting to link a new file. The files are appended to the '''log''' block as they are found by '''include''', which means that the file found last will be the last one in the log.

===='''''stack'''''====

The stack used by the '''push''' and '''pop''' helper functions (see below). There is no need to use the variable directly.

===='''''block-directive'''''====

Handling a subblock or paren.

===='''''conditional-directives'''''====

The definitions of #if and #either conditional directives.

===='''''standard-directives'''''====

The definitions of the standard directives (all except the block directive, conditional directives and special includes).

===='''''special-includes'''''====

The definitions of #include-binary, #include-string and #include-files directives.

===='''''directives'''''====

The '''''directives''''' variable refers to the block containing the definitions of directives that are currently used by '''include'''. There is usually no need to handle this variable directly since '''include-ctx/get-directives''', '''include-ctx/set-directives''' and '''include-ctx/update-directives''' take care of it.

===='''''standard-header'''''====

The '''''standard-header''''' variable refers to the script header prototype object. Defined for compatibility between R2 and R3.

===='''''file'''''====

The '''''file''''' variable refers to the file processed by INCLUDE.

===INCLUDE-CTX functions===

===='''''include-script'''''====

The function used by '''include''' and by directives to preprocess a script.

===='''''include-block'''''====

The function used by '''include-script''' and by directives to preprocess a block or a paren. Generated by the '''set-directives''' function.

===='''''get-directives'''''====

Refers to a function returning the directives block used by '''include'''. The directives block is the block containing the definitions of all '''include''' directives.

===='''''set-directives'''''====

Refers to a function setting the directives block used by '''include'''.

===='''''update-directives'''''====

Refers to a function updating the '''directives''' (not modifying the block, though) using the given '''directives-to-update''' block. If a directive contained in the '''directives-to-update''' block is already present in the '''directives''' block it is updated. Otherwise it is appended as a new directive.

The usage of the '''set-directives''' function to update/add new '''include''' '''directives''' is not particularly comfortable. This function should be used as a more comfortable helper.

===='''''push'''''====

Sometimes it is desirable to be able to temporarily redefine the '''''include-ctx/path''''' while being able to restore its previous value after some time. The '''push''' function takes a '''new-path''' argument storing the current '''''path''''' contents to the '''stack''' and using the given '''new-path''' instead.

===='''''pop'''''====

Restores the previous '''path''' value from the '''stack'''. It is the counterpart of the '''push''' function. If the '''stack''' is empty, an error is triggered.

===='''''do-next'''''====

Do next expression, using the &quot;R3 convention&quot;, compatible with R2 and R3.

===='''''load-next'''''====

Load the next value, compatible with R2 and R3.

===='''''read-binary'''''====

Read a binary value from a source, compatible with R2 and R3.

===='''''make-error'''''====

Make the error according to the given specifications, compatible with R2 and R3, allows setting the NEAR and WHERE attributes even in R2.

===='''''disarm-error'''''====

Disarm the error, compatible with R2 and R3.

===='''''redo-error'''''====
							
&quot;enhance&quot; (if needed) and redo the given error.

===='''''include-error'''''====
							
Create and trigger a new include-type error.
			
===='''''split-path'''''====

Splits the given path.

===='''''findpfile'''''====
			
Find the given file using the given search path.
			
===='''''find-file'''''====

Find a file (using INCLUDE-CTX/PATH if desired).

===The INCLUDE error type===

A new INCLUDE error type is defined, with the following ids:
		
====ENHANCED====

This error represents an, otherwise &quot;normal&quot; error that occurred during code preprocessing. The error is &quot;enhanced&quot; to &quot;know&quot; the file in which it occurred.

====FILE-OR-URL-IN-PATH====

A file or a URL was expected in the PATH.

====STACK-EMPTY====

The POP function found the STACK to be empty.

====FILE-NOT-FOUND====

The file to be included was not found.

====EXPECTED====

The directive expected an argument.

====INVALID-DIRECTIVE====

The UPDATE-DIRECTIVES function obtained an invalid directive specification in the DIRECTIVES-TO-UPDATE block.

==Usage examples==

A call equivalent to '''prebol''' processing &lt;code&gt;%somefile.r&lt;/code&gt; and storing the result of the preprocessing to &lt;code&gt;%outfile.r&lt;/code&gt; would look like:

&lt;pre&gt;include/link %somefile.r %outfile.r&lt;/pre&gt;

To change the '''include-ctx/path''':

&lt;pre&gt;append include-ctx/path url-or-directory&lt;/pre&gt;

The '''include''' call corresponding to the &lt;code&gt;#include-check&lt;/code&gt; directive is &lt;code&gt;include/check&lt;/code&gt;, which preprocesses and runs the script only if it hasn't done so before:

&lt;pre&gt;include/check %somefile.r&lt;/pre&gt;

The distinction between preprocessing directives and &quot;normal&quot; '''include''' usage is best described on simple examples:

The first example uses '''include''', but not the preprocessing directives:

&lt;pre&gt;REBOL [
    File: %script-builder.r
]

; create a new &quot;standard&quot; script from the script base
verbose: false
; use a clean LOG
clear include-ctx/log
include/link %script-base.r %standard-script.r

; now create a verbose version
verbose: true
clear include-ctx/log
include/link %script-base.r %verbose-script.r&lt;/pre&gt;

To create the two versions of the script containing everything they need to run it is sufficient to do:
 
&lt;pre&gt;include %script-builder.r&lt;/pre&gt;

, which takes care of creating both script versions.

The &lt;code&gt;%script-base.r&lt;/code&gt; file can look e.g. as follows:

&lt;pre&gt;REBOL [
    File: %script-base.r
]

#either [verbose] [debug: :print] [debug: none]
#include-check %part1.r
#include-check %part2.r
...&lt;/pre&gt;

===Context encapsulation===

It is possible to encapsulate contexts as follows:

&lt;pre&gt;REBOL [
    Title: &quot;my script&quot;
]
	
make object! [#include %your-script.r]
make module! [[module spec goes here] [#include %his-script.r]]&lt;/pre&gt;

==User-defined directives==

New directives are defined using '''set-directives''' function or, more comfortably, using the '''update-directives''' function, which allows selective updating of '''include directives'''. The directives are written in the parse dialect. Even the standard directives are defined this way; it is possible to take their definition as an example.

The '''directives''' block is bound to the '''include-block''' function context by the '''set-directives''' function. Furthermore, the user can bind his '''directives''' block to the '''include-ctx''' context if his directives use some of the '''include-ctx''' functions or variables.

The locals of the '''include-block''' function are:

===&lt;code&gt;pos1&lt;/code&gt;===

In the definitions of the standard directives it is being used to hold the current position in the block (or paren) being included. This variable can be and frequently is redefined.

===&lt;code&gt;pos2&lt;/code&gt;===

In the definitions of the standard directives it is being used to hold the next position (the position following the currently processed directive part) in the block (or paren) being included.

This variable can be and frequently is redefined.

===&lt;code&gt;value1&lt;/code&gt;===

In the definitions of the standard directives it is being used to hold the first argument value of the currently processed directive.

This variable can be and frequently is redefined.

===&lt;code&gt;value2&lt;/code&gt;===

In the definitions of the standard directives it is being used to hold the second argument value of the currently processed directive.

This variable can be and frequently is redefined.

===&lt;code&gt;value3&lt;/code&gt;===

In the definitions of the standard directives it is being used to hold the third argument value of the currently processed directive.

This variable can be and frequently is redefined.



==The #print directive example==

The #print directive is meant as the debug-print directive. It uses (potentially) the '''''debug''''' flag to &quot;decide&quot; whether to turn the directive into a '''print''' call, or simply leave it out from the code together with its argument.

Usage:

&lt;pre&gt;#print argument&lt;/pre&gt;


If the '''''debug''''' flag (global) is defined (set) when the #print directive is being processed the directive is turned into a '''print''' call; otherwise it is left out from the code.

===The definition of the #print directive===


&lt;pre&gt;Rebol [
    Title: &quot;Debug-print&quot;
    File: %debug-print.r
    Author: &quot;Ladislav Mecir&quot;
    Date: 21-Oct-2011/15:31:41+2:00
    Purpose: {Defines the #print directive}
    Notes: {
        uses the debug flag (global)
            if the debug flag is set, #print becomes print
            otherwise, #print and its argument are left out
    }
]

include-ctx/update-directives [
    #print set value1 skip (
        if value? 'debug [
            append linked 'print
            append/only linked get/any 'value1
        ]
    )
]&lt;/pre&gt;

==How to's==

==='''Include''' and relative paths===

To be compatible with '''do''' '''include''' changes the working directory to that of the script it is processing. Note that relative paths are relative to the actual working directory, not to the directory that was actual when such paths were put into the '''include-ctx/path''' block.

For example if we define:

&lt;pre&gt;include-ctx/path: reduce [%. clean-path %.]&lt;/pre&gt;

at the first sight it seems that the two elements in the above '''include-ctx/path''' are equivalent, but that is not true. The first one is a relative path always referring to the current working directory while the second one refers to the directory that was current when the '''include-ctx/path''' was defined.

===How to evaluate an expression using a #do directive without including a value into the script===

This directive evaluates an expression and includes its result 2 into the script:

&lt;pre&gt;#do [1 + 1]&lt;/pre&gt;

while this one evaluates the expression as well including nothing:

&lt;pre&gt;#do [1 + 1 []]&lt;/pre&gt;

===How to write code detecting whether it has been preprocessed===

When a script is running you may need to find out whether it has been preprocessed or not. Here is how:

&lt;pre&gt;print either (#do [false]) [&quot;this code wasn't preprocessed&quot;][&quot;this code was preprocessed&quot;]&lt;/pre&gt;

===How to write a part of a script that you don't want to be preprocessed===

Sometimes you want a part of the script to remain untouched by the preprocessor. This is a way how:

&lt;pre&gt;#do [[
    ; this part will not be preprocessed
    prin &quot;part1: &quot;
    print either (#do [false]) [&quot;not preprocessed&quot;] [&quot;preprocessed&quot;]
]]
	
; this part will be preprocessed
prin &quot;part2: &quot;
print either (#do [false]) [&quot;not preprocessed&quot;] [&quot;preprocessed&quot;]&lt;/pre&gt;

===How to write a block you don't want to be preprocessed===

Using the above trick we can do it as follows:

&lt;pre&gt;#do [[[
    print mold #include
]]]
&lt;/pre&gt;

===How to write code compatible with both '''do''' and '''include'''===

The &lt;code&gt;%include.r&lt;/code&gt; script may serve as an example of a script containing the preprocessor directives. Still you may want to write such a script so that its behaviour is the same whether it has been run by '''do''' or '''include'''.

Combining the tricks from the previous sections: 

&lt;pre&gt;do if (#do [false]) [func [a b] [do first b]] #do [[
    ; here we can put any code with preprocessor directives
    ; without worrying whether the user ran the script using DO or INCLUDE:
    print mold #include
    ; etc.
]]&lt;/pre&gt;

Another alternative - this time it is a block that remains unprocessed no matter whether the script is processed by '''do''' or '''include''':

&lt;pre&gt;do either (#do [false])[func [a b] [b/1/1]] [func [a] [:a]] #do [[[
    ; here I can put any code with or without preprocessor directives
    print mold #include
]]]&lt;/pre&gt;

===How to create a Windows Explorer association for '''include'''===

To create a Windows Explorer association so that you can right-click on a &lt;code&gt;.r&lt;/code&gt; file to run it using '''include''':

*Download the &lt;code&gt;%include.r&lt;/code&gt; script.
*Create a script file including any script
:This is an example file (use your own directory paths):
&lt;pre&gt;Rebol [
	Title: &quot;Incl.r3&quot;
	File: %incl.r3
	Author: &quot;Ladislav Mecir&quot;
	Date: 30-Sep-2011/10:23:03+2:00
	Purpose: {Includes the first argument file, works with R3}
]

; define the INCLUDE function
do %include.r

;---- R3 GUI
include %/d/ladislav/saphirion/trunk/r3-gui/loader/loader.r3

; include the argument script
include to-rebol-file system/script/args&lt;/pre&gt;
*Add a new association for &lt;code&gt;.r&lt;/code&gt; files. (Actually, you can add more associations. For example, I have one called &lt;code&gt;r2&lt;/code&gt; to evaluate the script using '''include''' and Rebol 2 interpreter and one called &lt;code&gt;r3&lt;/code&gt; to evaluate the script using '''include''' and the Rebol 3 interpreter.)

====How to add the new association for &lt;code&gt;.r&lt;/code&gt; files in Windows XP or older====

Run the Windows Explorer and click on &lt;code&gt;Tools/Options&lt;/code&gt; in menu. Next click on the &lt;code&gt;File Types&lt;/code&gt; tab and find the &lt;code&gt;.r&lt;/code&gt; file type associations. Click on the &lt;code&gt;Advanced&lt;/code&gt; button and add a new action. Call the new action &lt;code&gt;r3&lt;/code&gt; and the application associated with the new action may be e.g.:

&lt;pre&gt;&quot;D:\Rebol\r3.exe&quot; d:\rebol\incl.r3 &quot;%1&quot;&lt;/pre&gt;

(Adjust your directory appropriately). Next you can decide whether to make the &lt;code&gt;r3&lt;/code&gt; action default. If you make it default you can just double-click (or left-click if you set your Explorer for one click as I did) on a &lt;code&gt;.r&lt;/code&gt; file to include it. Otherwise you can right-click the file in Windows Explorer and pick the &lt;code&gt;r3&lt;/code&gt; action from the quick menu.

====How to add a new association for &lt;code&gt;.r&lt;/code&gt; files in Windows Vista, Windows 7 or Windows 8====

#Run the &lt;code&gt;regedit.exe&lt;/code&gt; program
#Find the &lt;code&gt;HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\.r&lt;/code&gt; key
#Examine its &lt;code&gt;(Default)&lt;/code&gt; value, should be something like &lt;code&gt;r_auto_file&lt;/code&gt;
#Find (or create) the &lt;code&gt;HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\r_auto_file&lt;/code&gt; key
#Find (or create) the &lt;code&gt;HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\r_auto_file\shell&lt;/code&gt; subkey
#Under the &lt;code&gt;shell&lt;/code&gt; key find (or create) a new &lt;code&gt;open&lt;/code&gt; subkey and a new &lt;code&gt;r3&lt;/code&gt; subkey
#Under the &lt;code&gt;open&lt;/code&gt; key add a new &lt;code&gt;command&lt;/code&gt; subkey
#Change the &lt;code&gt;(Default)&lt;/code&gt; value of the &lt;code&gt;command&lt;/code&gt; key to something like &lt;code&gt;&quot;D:\Rebol\rebol.exe&quot; d:\rebol\incl.r &quot;%1&quot;&lt;/code&gt; (do not forget to use your directory paths).
#Under the &lt;code&gt;r3&lt;/code&gt; key add a new &lt;code&gt;command&lt;/code&gt; subkey
#Change the &lt;code&gt;(Default)&lt;/code&gt; value of the &lt;code&gt;command&lt;/code&gt; key to something like &lt;code&gt;&quot;D:\Rebol\r3.exe&quot; d:\rebol\incl.r3 &quot;%1&quot;&lt;/code&gt; (do not forget to use your directory paths).

Having added the association for the &lt;code&gt;.r&lt;/code&gt; files left-clicking a &lt;code&gt;.r&lt;/code&gt; file will run it in the &lt;code&gt;rebol.exe&lt;/code&gt; interpreter while right-clicking a &lt;code&gt;.r&lt;/code&gt; file in the Windows Explorer you will see new &lt;code&gt;open&lt;/code&gt; and &lt;code&gt;r3&lt;/code&gt; options, being able to choose which interpreter you want to start.

In the same way you can define the &lt;code&gt;open&lt;/code&gt; association for &lt;code&gt;.r3&lt;/code&gt; files.

==Availability==

'''Include''' is available from [http://www.rebol.org/view-script.r?script=ladislav-include.r http://www.rebol.org/view-script.r?script=ladislav-include.r].

== Changelog ==

8-Apr-2013/13:00:27+2:00

* INCLUDE/LINK now using MOLD/FLAT

15-Mar-2013/12:17:52+1:00

* INCLUDE/only update
** to help Cyphre use it for encapping purposes
** returns the REBOL header spec part in the result block if available

26-Dec-2012/15:00:27+1:00

* license updated to Apache 2.0

14-Nov-2012/15:18:01+1:00

* header processing reimplemented to really work
* header handling changed
** it is not a requirement to have a script header now in a manner compatible with R3 DO
* the 'FILE variable moved from the INCLUDE-BLOCK context to INCLUDE-CTX
** scripts can read the variable now,
** &quot;knowing&quot; what is being processed (before, only directives &quot;knew&quot; the variable)
* INCLUDE-CTX/LOAD-NEXT function defined
** for compatibility with R2 and R3
* SCRIPT? function patched
* INCLUDE function:
** result corrected in a couple of special cases
** help strings improved
* source punctuation improved
* documentation updated

21-Sep-2012/15:02:28+2:00

* addition of the STANDARD-HEADER variable to INCLUDE-CTX
* script header processing added
* doc update
* the complete file made available from the rebol.org site

10-Feb-2012/6:55:55+1:00

* adding the READ-BINARY function to INCLUDE-CTX
* updating the #include-binary and #include-files directives to work in R3

17-Jan-2012/17:57:49+1:00

* circumventing the APPEND bug in R2

12-Jan-2012/14:35:27+1:00

* /only refinement defined for the UPDATE-DIRECTIVES function
* SPECIAL-INCLUDES defined

9-Jan-2012/14:58:59+1:00

* the &quot;in-file&quot; bug in standard directives corrected
* &quot;pointer&quot; file posted to [http://www.rebol.org/view-script.r?script=ladislav-include.r rebol.org]

10-Nov-2011/10:59:35+1:00

* '''include-ctx/standard-directives''' subdivided ('''block-directive''' defined)
* the block directive corrected (the correct '''''value1''''' variable used)
* a new '''invalid-directive''' include error defined
* the '''update-directives''' function updated to trigger the '''invalid-directive''' error
* '''include''' type errors documented
* changes documented
* directive identification adjusted
* block-directive adjusted to be identifiable
* #if, #either, #do, #include-files directives adjusted

8-Nov-2011/15:04:20+1:00

* '''include-ctx/conditional-directives''' defined (improving the support for localization or other user-defined sets of directives)
* '''include-ctx/standard-directives''' defined (all standard directives except for the conditional ones)
* comments in the code updated
* no incompatibilities with the previous version expected

21-Oct-2011/23:35:31+2:00

* '''update-directives''' function adjusted to not modify the '''directives''' block, replacing it instead (safer)
* '''update-directives''' function defined
* the debug-print example changed to use '''update-directives'''
* comments added to the code
* the #include-binary and #include-string directives adjusted
** handling the situations when the '''find-file''' function doesn't find the given file
* doc changes

13-Oct-2011/01:58:00+2:00

* RebGUI create-distribution problem solved
* the COMMENT directive made standard
* the '''include-ctx''' context defined
* '''include''' variables (see above) moved to the '''include-ctx''' context
** (watch out for the obsolete use of '''include-path''', '''include-log''', '''include-push''' and '''include-pop''')
* all helper functions moved to the '''include-ctx''' context (see above)
** , which makes it easier for the user to use any of the helper functions in his own directives
* the '''include-parser''' function does not exist anymore
* the '''set-directives''' function now generates the '''include-block''' function
* the '''''localize-block''''' removed from the standard code
** (localization code now more complex, but more separate from the &quot;standard code&quot;)
* error handling changed
** '''include''' error type defined
** the '''make-error''' function can define the '''near''' and '''where''' error attributes even in R2
* the #print directive definition reflects the '''include''' changes
* documentation updated
* more comments in the %include.r file
* %include.r code cleaned up

==See also==

This [http://www.rebol.org/art-display-article.r?article=w24v article] describes how '''include''' was ported to Rebol 3.