We now try to remove spaces that would sometimes appear before a newline. In the example below, there are no spaces following the c and the f before the newline.

   [
       abc
       def
   ]


Also, for /all keep in mind that just like in R2:

   mold/all none => #[none]
   mold/all true => #[true]
   mold/all false => #[false]

These are common shortcut cases. We make them easier because for these specific cases, programmers may actually type them into their code.

===Question about MOLD/only===

Should mold/only on objects remove the MAKE object! part of the mold and also the brackets?

===Long Term Solution===

MOLD can potentially have quite a few other refinements. For example, the precision of decimal values or use of , not . for decimals. Rather than make each of these a refinement, it is more likely that we will allow an object to specify the variations.

   mold/options block [decimal-precision: 10]

==MOLD/all==

There are a few changes to mold/all:

First, we do not think that these datatypes should require mold/all special #[ datatype format, because nothing is gained. (Tell Carl if you think there is a missed case for any of them.)

*integer     
*decimal
*percent     
*money       
*char        
*pair        
*tuple       
*time        
*date        
*word        
*set-word    
*get-word    
*lit-word    
*refinement  
*port        

These datatypes are still pending implementation for MOLD/all:

*gob
*event
*vector
*unicode
*struct
*routine
*task

(And, there are likely a few more.)