This document specifies the R3 I/O port functions.

== Important conceptual changes ==

Some fundamental changes have been made to ports.

#Ports default to binary, not to string.
#String ports expect an encoding for read and write.
#By default, the string encoding is UTF-8, but others are allowed.
#String terminators are converted as well. REBOL strings default to LF.

=== READ is binary by default ===

When you open a port (or read or write on an unopened file or URL), if you do not specify an encoding, the port will be opened as binary by default.

For example:

  data: read %file

will return data as a binary value, as sequence of raw bytes. No conversion is done.

'''The main benefit is that non-textual files, such as images and sounds, will not be corrupted in this default case.''' We are trading a bit of ease-of-use for safety. It is a good trade.

To read the file as a string:

  data: read/string %file

The file will be decoded into a string using some simple rules about the encoding:

#If the file starts with a byte order marker (BOM), then that encoding will be applied.
#If the file has no BOM, then UTF-8 is expected. Note that UTF-8 includes, without conversion, ASCII (7-bit chars), but not Latin-1.

See more about READ options below.

=== WRITE depends on datatype ===

When you write to a port, file, or URL, the default is to use binary as well:

   write %file data

It is also possible to write it as a string:

   write/string file data

However, this is not required. REBOL knows the datatype of the content data and will do the right thing for binary and string. So, WRITE will auto-encode the content, using the default encoding (UTF-8).

See more about WRITE options below.

=== Effect on common idiom ===

The above change has an impact the line conversion method we often use in REBOL. The code:

   write %file2 read %file1

'''no longer converts line terminators''' (e.g. CRLF). Instead, this line must be used:

   write %file2 read/string %file1

This tells READ to decode the file into a string. Note that the WRITE does not require a /string refinement, because it is being provided with a string datatype. The default encoding is applied.

== Definition of READ ==

The READ function is currently defined as:

<pre>
USAGE:
        READ source /binary /string /as encoding /lines /part size /skip length

DESCRIPTION:
        Reads from a port, file, or URL.
        READ is an action value.

ARGUMENTS:
        source (port! file! url! block!)

REFINEMENTS:
        /binary -- Read as bytes, no conversion
        /string -- Read as string, encoded from BOM, default to UTF-8, converts terminators
        /as -- Read using the given encoding, such as UTF-8
                encoding -- BOM UTF-8 UTF-16LE UTF-16BE ASCII LATIN-1 CR LF CRLF (word! block!)
        /lines -- Read as strings, splitting into a block of lines
        /part -- Read a specified number of bytes (not chars)
                size (number!)
        /skip -- Skip a number of bytes (not chars)
                length -- Byte offset, negative end offset, or 'end (number!)
</pre>

As stated above, the /binary refinement is the default.

Other refinements work as indicated.

Note that various refinements have been removed. We can add them back as we choose, but for performance, we want to specify as few refinements as possible.

=== The /AS refinement ===

The /as refinement will accept a word or a block. It is used to specify the encoding of the data. For example, a file may be encoded as UTF-8, UTF-16LE, JPEG, WAVE, etc.

In general, the benefit of performing the encoding as part of the WRITE is that it can be done as part of the buffering process, eliminating the need to a separate encoding pass, and also allowing encoded streams.

format...

words...

complications related to partial or hanging bytes

== Definition of WRITE ==

== Definition of OPEN ==