__NOTOC__

Getting started with REBOL is really simple.

== Download REBOL 2 for your platform==

Free downloads for students, educators, hobbyists, and small organizations:&lt;P&gt;

'''REBOL/View 2.7 for Graphical Applications''' http://www.rebol.com/view-platforms.html &lt;BR&gt;
Designed for graphical applications on end-user systems. &lt;BR&gt;&lt;BR&gt;

'''REBOL/Core 2.7 for Server Applications''' http://www.rebol.com/platforms.html&lt;BR&gt;
Don't need graphics? Download REBOL/Core &lt;BR&gt;&lt;BR&gt;

Advanced commercial REBOL programming applications and services are at http://www.rebol.com/products.html&gt;

==Setup==

REBOL installation is quite easy but we suggest you to read the following documentation.

http://www.rebol.com/docs/setup.html


Getting started with Linux is slightly different see: [[Setting up in Linux]] .

==Examples==

In the REBOL desktop click on the REBOL icon at the top, select DEMOS and choose one. With left mouse click you start the demo. With right mouse click you see the notes and if you click on the EDIT button the source of the demo will open.

You will be amazed of how small are all REBOL applications.

==Documentation==

The main documentation source page is: [[R2_Documentation|Documentation]]&lt;BR&gt;&lt;BR&gt;
[http://www.rebol.com/docs/quick-start.html Quick Start] By Carl Sassenrath.
&lt;BR&gt;
[http://www.rebol.com/docs/quick-start2.html Quick Start Part 2] By Carl Sassenrath.
&lt;BR&gt;
[http://musiclessonz.com/rebol_tutorial.html REBOL Programming For The Absolute Beginner] By Nick Antonaccio.

&lt;BR&gt;
[[Rebol2:TenMinutesGuide|Ten minutes with REBOL 2]]  A short introduction.
&lt;BR&gt;