'''A place for developers to add notes related to the [http://www.rebol.com/r3/docs/concepts/host-kit.html R3 Host-Kit].'''

You can use four ~ to add your name and date to comments (optional).

==A107 10-September-2010==

* Depending on your toolchain, the makefile in the Linux A107 Host Kit may need a fix for A107 to build, as first noted by Andreas: add &lt;tt&gt;-ldl&lt;/tt&gt; to &lt;tt&gt;LIBS&lt;/tt&gt; in line 16.

==A104 26-August-2010==

* The makefile needs a minor fix for A104 to build, as first noted by Adrian. See [http://www.curecode.org/rebol3/ticket.rsp?id=1643 bug#1643] for a fix to work around this.

==A102 29-July-2010==

* Andreas has the Linux host-kit build working now using the libr3-a102.so. -[[User:Carl|Carl]] 13:49, 30 July 2010 (EDT)

* You can download Cyphre's codeblocks project file (Windows) here: http://www.rebol.cz/r3/host-kit/r3.cbp

* Adrian has contributed a solution file for Visual Studio 2010: http://www.rebol.cz/r3/host-kit/r3-host-kit-msbuild-a102.zip

===Building the Host Kit on Win32 using MinGW===

* Download the [http://sourceforge.net/projects/mingw/files/Automated%20MinGW%20Installer/MinGW%205.1.6/MinGW-5.1.6.exe/download MinGW 5.1.6 installer] and install ''as admin'' (preferably to &lt;tt&gt;c:\mingw&lt;/tt&gt;, but see the note below)
* Add &lt;tt&gt;mingw\bin&lt;/tt&gt; to the windows command path 
* Download the R3 A102 Host Kit for Windows and unpack
* Open a normal Windows command prompt, change to the unpacked host kit directory
* Copy &lt;tt&gt;mingw32-make.exe&lt;/tt&gt; from &lt;tt&gt;mingw\bin&lt;/tt&gt; to the host kit directory as &lt;tt&gt;make.exe&lt;/tt&gt;
* Run &lt;tt&gt;make&lt;/tt&gt;
* Test the &lt;tt&gt;r3.exe&lt;/tt&gt; built by running &lt;tt&gt;r3 go.r&lt;/tt&gt;

''Note'': the default makefile supplied with the hostkit assumes that mingw is installed to &lt;tt&gt;c:\mingw&lt;/tt&gt;. The directory path is at the top of the makefile so you can easily edit it there .. there's only one occurrence.

===Building the Host Kit using Code::Blocks===

* Download the [http://prdownload.berlios.de/codeblocks/codeblocks-10.05mingw-setup.exe Code::Blocks 10.05 MingW installer] and install
* Download the R3 A102 Host Kit for Windows and unpack
* Download [http://www.rebol.cz/r3/host-kit/r3.cbp Cyphre's project file] and store it where you unpacked the host kit
* Start the Code::Blocks IDE and open the &lt;tt&gt;r3.cbp&lt;/tt&gt; file (File &gt; Open Project)

===Building the Host Kit using Visual Studio 2010 or MSBuild (no IDE, only Windows SDK, required)===
* Download [http://www.rebol.cz/r3/host-kit/r3-host-kit-make-vc10-a107.zip Visual Studio 2010 solution] and unarchive it where you unpacked the host kit (should be sibling to the older VS build directories. All artifacts of this build will be produced under this directory (except for some generated C files). 
* Start up Visual Studio 2010 and open the solution file r3.sln. This solution contains four projects - r3 (the full R3 including Draw - for R3 GUI you'll need Henrik's external source at this time), r3-core, and two other projects that the first two depend on to create some needed C source files using a REBOL executable. The C file generation depends on REBOL 3 (a pre-compiled version of a107 is included in this archive, parallel to the build files) being on the path with the name rebol.exe. If you already have R3 on the path, this local copy of REBOL 3 can be deleted.
* In the Solution Explorer, you can right click on the r3, r3-core (and other) projects to invoke the build or clean targets (there's currently an issue in that only the first of the generated graphics related includes is cleaned by the clean command). Note that the generated files are the only artifacts outside of the directory containing the MS build files which are deleted by the clean target. These will be re-generated if their REBOL source dependencies change, including the the generator source itself).

The VS 2010 project format is the same as that of the MSBuild tool since this version of Visual Studio hosts an embedded MSBuild to provide build support. You should be able to run MSBuild on the project files referenced above.