{{underconstruction}}

This page explains how we want to manage testing R3.

==Top Level==

'''Testing a language is difficult.''' If you were to enumerate the total number of tests required to fully test R3, it would likely be over one hundred thousand, if not more.


So what does that really mean? Well, time has taught us these important lessons:

#No one person is going to write all the tests.
#Testing takes a lot of thought -- to figure out what and how to test.
#Testers get tired quickly -- both from quantity (number of tests) and from quality (thinking about how to test).
#New testers must be able to understand the prior tests.
#It should be easy to understand how to contribute new tests.


That has lead us to where we are today. We know from experience:

#There must be a '''standard system''' of managing tests.
#All tests must abide by a '''standard format'''.
#All tests should be '''clean, simple, specific, and self-contained'''.


Also, we know that we want the test system to be:

#'''Fast to access'''. There needs to be zero overhead in adding a test, after all many tests come from an "ah-ha let's test that" so anything that slows it down will stop it.
#'''Accessible to all'''. A user who needs decimals to work right might only want to contribute decimal tests. Don't block that desire!
#'''Always online'''. The R3 community is worldwide. While we sleep, others are contributing.

==Testing Priorities==

It's important to have testing priorities. After all, if the basic R3 system doesn't work, or the datatypes don't work, or the control functions don't work, then how can any of the tests work properly?

So, the '''[[R3 Alpha Test Priorities]]''' provides the current list.

==Current Situation==

'''Currently, there are a variety of tests, written in a variety of methods, over a variety of files.''' Some of these test files date back more than 8 years.

While such tests can prove quite useful, over the long run they are problematic -- because the person who wrote a test yesterday is not likely to be the person who wants to improve on that same test next year.

'''So, a system is required.''' It does not have to be complex. In fact, it should be simple enough that all users can understand and contribute if they so desire.

==The Test System==

The VID2 story.

Main structure: management, engine, tests.

==Test management==

Essentially everyone should be allowed to contribute a new test vector, approval is needed for a contributed test vector to be included into the "official test suite".

==Test data==

These types of data are expected:

*Submission data
**submitted test vectors (in a database)
*Test file, used
**to import preapproved test vectors to the database
**to export test vectors from the database
**to run tests

==Test Vectors==

Most of the time, one liners.

Requirements:

*It looks impractical to require every test vector to be in a file of its own, if we use several thousands of tests.
*Loadability of the test vector code is a subject to testing too, therefore it is not good to assume, that the code is loadable.

These requirements can be fulfilled either by using a string to represent the test code, or by using a special parser not assuming loadability.

==Pending Notes==

system overview
test files
test sections
test vectors
shared db