__NOTOC__

<!-- BEGIN CONTENTS BOX -->
{| style="width:85%; border:1px solid SlateBlue; background:Cornsilk; color:black; padding:1em; font-size:120%; margin:1px auto;"
 |-
 |
'''[[Rebol_2#What Is Rebol|Introduction]]''' 

'''[[R2_Getting_Started|Getting Started With Rebol]] <small>''start here''</small>

'''[[R2_Documentation|Documentation]]'''

'''[[R2_on_the_net|Rebol on the net]]'''

'''[[R2_code|Rebol2 Examples]]'''

'''[http://www.rebol.net/builds/ Alpha & Beta Releases]
 |
'''[[R2_projects|Rebol Projects]]'''

'''[[R2_companies|Some Commercial Examples]]'''

'''[[Users|Who is Who]]'''

'''[[R2_migrating_to_R3|Migrating to Rebol3]]'''

'''[[View|View]]'''

'''[[R2_other|Other topics]]'''

 |-
 | colspan="2" align="center" |
'''[[DocBase:Community_Portal|Community portal]]'''
 |}
<!-- END CONTENTS BOX -->


==What is Rebol==

Rebol is a data exchange language and a programming language, but if you are here you probably already know this.<BR>
It is an interpreted language in which the interpreter loads your program (henceforth called a script) in memory and executes it.<BR><BR>
Some points about Rebol:<BR>

Rebol 2 was released in 1999.<BR>
*Rebol scripts are short and expressive. In a single line you can write an entire program.
*The language can be extended with "dialects" that enable the programmer to add new WORDS for specific domains.
*It is multi-platform. The same script can run on many OS's with no changes.
*It includes a GUI system for light or heavy applications.
*It is FAST. With a single loop you can search for an entry in a million of records in less than a second.

Rebol has been created by one of the gurus of the computing world - [[User:Carl|'''Carl Sassenrath''']].<BR><BR>

See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rebol

==Why Rebol==

'''Why use Rebol?'''

* Tired of installs that consume gigabytes and take hours to configure? Rebol setup is very fast: download the interpreter, run it and the Rebol environment is ready.
* Create applications in less time with its highly expressive yet concise syntax. Download and process an entire web page in one line of code.
* Connect to the X Internet.

==Rebol 2 or Rebol 3?==

Rebol 3 is currently under [[R3_Releases|development]]. The concepts are essentially those of Rebol 2, but it has been extended in many ways.

For any production work, you should use Rebol 2 as it is a complete and quite stable. The adventurous might want to experiment with Rebol 3 in its present state, with the expectation that there will be bugs and undocumented areas to deal with.

Once comfortable with Rebol 2, the changes in Rebol 3 should present no difficulty, and by that time Rebol 3 should be ready for you with a more stable base.

{{Need|Rework all subpages for a better look and add text, they are too short}}