{{Cookbook|title=Release Process|author=Henrik Mikael Kristensen|level=1|category=RT Developer}}

REBOL Technologies wants to have a standardized release process. Currently this is shaping up for the first Alpha release of REBOL 3 and is necessary to make future releases go as smoothly as possibly. This document is intended for people unfamiliar with the release process and want to understand it.

'''For developers, who must participate in this process, this document is mandatory reading.'''

== Schedules ==

No schedules are maintained other than '''work as quickly as possible toward a release'''. It is currently decided on a review of R3's status and whether there are no difficult bugs to solve, whether it's time to make a release. When it becomes time for that, the release process begins.

== Getting into the Release Process ==

There is no formal way to entering the release process other than having access on the R3-alpha AltME world. If you want to, you can participate immediately, provided that you read this document in its entirety first.

== DevBase ==

DevBase holds all the open parts of the source code to REBOL 3 and is the only method to update source code to REBOL 3 prior to release. To read more about how to use DevBase, click [[DevBase|here]].

== Files ==

All files are held in the R3-alpha world on AltME. If you have access to this world, then you should be able to browse the files of all versions of the public alpha releases and be able to download them for study and testing. Here's a quick overview of the structure:

:'''Releases'''
::Dev
:::R30-A01
::::''Distribution files''
:::R30-A02
::::''Distribution files''
:::...
::Test
:::R30-A01
::::''Distribution files''
:::R30-A02
::::''Distribution files''
:::...
::Release
:::R30-A01
::::''Distribution files''
:::...

=== Dev, Test and Release Directories ===

The directories named '''Dev''', '''Test''' and '''Release''', each represent a different stage in the release process. Files are copied to another stage, when they progress in development. When a file from /Releases/Dev/R30-A01/ is ready for testing, it is copied to /Releases/Test/R30-A01/ and so forth.

==== 1. Development Stage (Dev) ====

This stage is the first where the bleeding edge version of R3 is stored along with other distribution files. The R3 version here is built directly from the sources in DevBase, while examples and text files are uploaded or "born" in this directory. The content may therefore not be stable. When it is time for a release, the content is copied to the '''Test''' directory for last minute testing. Any developer, even those not assigned to the release process, can work in this directory.

==== 2. Testing Stage (Test) ====

Just prior to release, an intense amount of testing is done straight out of the '''Test''' directory. From this directory, developers assigned to the release process are asked to test every single file for outstanding bugs. If any bugs or typos are present in an example or in the text files, the developer goes back to the '''Dev''' directory, correct the bug and notify the release manager, so he can upload it to the '''Test''' directory.

==== 3. Release Stage (Release) ====

When the files from the '''Test''' directory show no outstanding bugs, they are copied in here. Here, you are not allowed to tamper with the files as they must match the release version. The files are then compressed into a zip archive and that archive is published on a public location on http://www.rebol.net/ and a public announcement is made by Carl Sassenrath on his website.

=== Distribution Files ===

Right now, the distribution is made up of the following files:

;Rebhost.exe
:This is the main executable. It requires Rebol.dll in order to run. Just click on this file to run REBOL 3.
;Rebol.dll
:This is the core of REBOL 3. Currently REBOL 3 is delivered in this format for easier updating of the core.
;Readme.txt
:This is a makedoc2 formatted file that contains information about this release of the distribution.
;Readme.html
:This is an HTML version of Readme.txt.
;graphics directory
:This directory contains images used in Readme.html
;Examples directory
:This contains examples made by various developers on the REBOL 3 team.

== Who is Releasing REBOL 3? ==

The release process is managed by Maarten Koopmans. He delegates work and oversees what needs to be done in order to complete the process of releasing a version of REBOL 3.

;Contributions and Examples:

:All REBOL 3 developers

;Quality testing:

:Anton Rolls
:Petr Krenzelok
:Carl Sassenrath

;Documentation of the release process:

:Henrik Mikael Kristensen
:Brian Tiffin
:Maarten Koopmans

;Final release approval:

:Carl Sassenrath
:Maarten Koopmans

''Please add yourself to this list, if you are not here.''

==Cookbook References==

{{:Cookbook References}}