'''A scheme specifies a type of port.''' Schemes are defined for files, networking, sound, and many other functions. Users can define their own schemes or modify the existing schemes.

==Related Scheme Docs==

*[[Schemes:Notes]]

==Origin of the Name "Scheme"==

The name ''scheme'' comes from the standard description of a URI (URL). In this URL:

    http://www.rebol.net/index.html

HTTP is the scheme name, www.rebol.net is the host, and index.html is the file path. REBOL uses that same naming convention.

== Built-in schemes ==

A variety of schemes are built-into REBOL 3 and can be used immediately on boot.

Here is a partial list of built-in schemes:

<blockquote>
{| border=1 cellspacing=0 cellpadding=4
!style="background-color:silver"|Scheme
!style="background-color:silver"|Description
|-
| '''system''' || System port (primary event dispatcher)
|-
| '''stdio''' || Standard input and output
|-
| '''stderr''' || Standard error
|-
| '''console''' || REBOL interactive console
|-
| '''file''' || Local file access
|-
| '''dir''' || Local file directory access
|-
| '''event''' || GUI event handling
|-
| '''DNS''' || Domain name lookup
|-
| '''TCP''' || Transfer control protocol
|-
| '''UDP''' || User datagram protocol
|-
| '''HTTP''' || [[Scheme: HTTP|Hypertext transfer protocol]]
|-
| '''shell''' || External shell commands (call)
|-
| '''serial''' || Serial port access
|-
| '''USB''' || USB serial port access
|-
| '''mutex''' || Mutual exclusion locks
|}
</blockquote>

More (such as FTP, SMTP, POP) will be included as time and user-base contributions permit.

To obtain a list of the current schemes, you can write:

    probe words-of system/schemes

or:

   foreach val get system/schemes [print [val/name val/title]]

== Scheme object structure ==

The scheme object is defined in system/standard as:

    scheme: context [
        name:       ; word of http, ftp, sound, etc.
        title:      ; user-friendly title for the scheme
        spec:       ; custom spec for scheme (if needed)
        info:       ; prototype info object returned from query
        actor:      ; standard action handler for scheme port functions
        awake:      ; standard awake handler for this scheme's ports
            none
    ]

Where:

<blockquote>
; name : is the type of scheme. This is the word used in the first part of the URL, such as TCP, HTTP, FTP, etc.. It must be a valid REBOL word (e.g. cannot begin with a number).
; title : is the title of the scheme for user identification and documentation purposes.
; spec : an object used to specify additional features of the scheme.
; info : an prototype object that is instantiated for a query on the scheme.
; actor : the handler function that processes standard actions a port of this scheme type. For example, open, close, read, write, etc.
; awake : a callback function that is invoked when new events arrive for a port of this scheme type.
</blockquote>


== Adding a new scheme ==

The <tt>make-scheme</tt> function creates a new scheme from a block object specification.

(show example)


[[Notes|Draft Notes]]