The TAKE function removes values from a series and returns them as a result.

==Concept==

A common pattern found in queues and stacks is to remove a value, returning the value as a result:

    value: first series
    remove series

This code would return the value, and also remove it from the series.

The pattern is so common that R3 adds a new function, TAKE, that can be used on all series datatypes. Using TAKE, the above example would be reduced to just:

    value: take series

and, the result is the same as above.

==Quick examples==

TAKE can be used with INSERT or APPEND to implement a number of stack and queue methods. For example, a queue can be implemented as:

    append stack value1
    ...
    value2: take stack

And, with the TAKE/last refinement, a stack is implemented with:

    append stack value1
    ...
    value2: take/last stack

==Usage==

Help returns this information about TAKE:

&lt;pre&gt;
USAGE:
        TAKE value /part length /deep /last

DESCRIPTION:
         Copies and removes from series. (Modifies)
         TAKE is an action value.

ARGUMENTS:
         value -- (Type: series! gob! port! none!)

REFINEMENTS:
         /part -- Limits to a given length or position
                 length -- (Type: number! series! port! pair!)
         /deep -- Also copies series values within the block
         /last -- Take it from the tail end
&lt;/pre&gt;

Note that TAKE works anywhere within a series, not just at the head and tail.

For example:

    value: take at series 10

will remove the value at series position 10 and return it.

So, the TAKE/last refinement is also roughly equivalent to:

    value: take back tail series

==Take/part refinement==

take/part works like the copy/part, with a few differences.

    &gt;&gt; take/part [1 2 3 4 5] 1
    == [1]

    &gt;&gt; take/part [1 2 3 4 5] 2
    == [1 2]

Copy/part returns [] in the case of an empty series. Take/part returns none, just as it does without the /part refinement.

    &gt;&gt; take []
    == none

    &gt;&gt; take/part [] 2
    == none 

Take/part/last works it's way backwards.

    &gt;&gt; take/last/part [1 2 3 4 5] 2
    == [4 5]

With /last, /part is negated. Using a negative value for the length, combined with /last, takes values going forward.

    &gt;&gt; take/last/part [1 2 3 4 5] -2
    == none

    &gt;&gt; take/part at [1 2 3 4 5] 3 -2
    == [1 2]

    &gt;&gt; take/last/part at [1 2 3 4 5] 3 -2
    == [4 5]

???

    &gt;&gt; take/part [1 2 3 4 5] -2
    == [1 2 3 4 5]


TBD - mention /deep for copying subseries values