A few tests...

== wiki-function-list ==

&lt;code&gt;&gt;&gt; wiki-function-list [now parse load]&lt;/code&gt;

Returns:

=== NOW ===
Returns the current local date and time.
NOW is a native value.
==== Refinements ====
: '''/year''' -- Returns the year only. 
: '''/month''' -- Returns the month only. 
: '''/day''' -- Returns the day of the month only. 
: '''/time''' -- Returns the time only. 
: '''/zone''' -- Returns the time zone offset from GMT only. 
: '''/date''' -- Returns date only. 
: '''/weekday''' -- Returns day of the week as integer (Monday is day 1). 
: '''/yearday''' -- Returns day of the year (Julian) 
: '''/precise''' -- Use nanosecond precision 

=== PARSE ===
Parses a series according to rules.
PARSE is a native value.
==== Arguments ====
: '''input''' -- Input series to parse (Type: series)
: '''rules''' -- Rules to parse by (Type: block string none)

==== Refinements ====
: '''/all''' -- Parses all chars including spaces. 
: '''/case''' -- Uses case-sensitive comparison. 

=== LOAD ===
Loads a file, URL, or string. Binds words to global context.
LOAD is a native value.
==== Arguments ====
: '''source''' -- (Type: file url string any-block binary)

==== Refinements ====
: '''/header''' -- Includes REBOL header object if present. 
: '''/next''' -- Load the next value only. Return block with value and new position. 
: '''/library''' -- Force file to be a dynamic library. (Command version) 
: '''/markup''' -- Convert HTML and XML to a block of tags and strings. 
: '''/all''' -- Load all values. Does not evaluate REBOL header.

== wiki-table ==

&lt;code&gt;&gt;&gt; wiki-table/header [[Luke Skywalker][Darth Vader][Han Solo]] [&quot;First Name&quot; &quot;Last Name&quot;]&lt;/code&gt;

Returns:

{|
!First!!Name!!Last!!Name
|-
| Luke 
| Skywalker 
|- 
| Darth 
| Vader 
|- 
| Han 
| Solo 
|}

== wiki-link-table ==

&lt;code&gt;&gt;&gt; wiki-link-table [[word1 word2 word3 word4 word5][word6 word7 word8 word9 word10]]&lt;/code&gt;

Returns:

{|
| [[word1]] 
| [[word2]] 
| [[word3]] 
| [[word4]] 
| [[word5]] 
|- 
| [[word6]] 
| [[word7]] 
| [[word8]] 
| [[word9]] 
| [[word10]] 
|}

== wiki-dump-obj ==

&lt;code&gt;&gt;&gt; wiki-dump-obj make object! [a: 5 b: 8 c: &quot;stuff&quot;]&lt;/code&gt;

Returns:

{|
!Word!!Description
|-
|'''a'''
|5
|-
|'''b'''
|8
|-
|'''c'''
|&quot;stuff&quot;
|}