===Options===

'''Style/options''' specify the optional attributes that can be supplied as arguments in the GUI dialect block. Each option can specify one or more valid datatypes. When a GUI block is parsed, any valid options are set in the face/options and face/facets objects.

This block is very important to users because it defines the usage of the style to the user. 

For example, a BUTTON style allows these options:

    options: [
        text-body: [string! block!]
        area-color: [tuple!]
        size: [pair!]
        wide: [percent!]
    ]

Within the GUI dialect, usage might be:

    button &quot;Example&quot; blue
    button green &quot;Go&quot;
    button &quot;Stop&quot; 100x100 red

On initialization, each option value will appear within the face/options object and also within the face/facets object, where it can be used by the draw block and by the style actor functions.

''Note that the options block is not inherited from a parent style.'' This is done to make it very clear what user options are allowed for the
style.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
===Options===
&lt;TABLE CELLPADDING=10 CELLSPACING=10&gt;&lt;TR&gt;&lt;TD WIDTH=50% VALIGN=TOP&gt;
'''Face/options''' is an object that holds any optional attributes that were provided to the face when it was defined. For example, the text label of a button would be put here.

The names and types of values stored in the face/options object is defined by the options field of the style. This field is used to parse and type check the options and then create this face/options object.
&lt;/TD&gt;&lt;TD VALIGN=TOP&gt;
For example:

  button &quot;Submit&quot; submit site-url

Would create an options object:

  text-body: &quot;Submit&quot;

Note that face actions are not stored in this options object. They are parsed separately and stored in the optional face/actions block.

The face/options object can also be used to reset a face back to its initial value. If a style requires this ability, it should always COPY its option series values, in order to be able to restore them later.
&lt;/TD&gt;&lt;/TR&gt;&lt;/TABLE&gt;