===Actors===

The '''actors''' field of the compound object of a face is a map of the functions that define the behavior of the face. Whenever an event or other action occurs, these are the functions that handle it. (In some GUI systems, these are called ''interactors''.)

If a style object is derived from a parent style, the parent actors are inherited from the parent object. But the derived actors are not bound to the parent. This allows the functions of the actor to be more efficiently reused in all instances of the face. Within an actor, a reference to a facet is made via special access functions.

'''Typical actors are:'''
&lt;TABLE&gt;&lt;TR&gt;&lt;TD WIDTH=50% VALIGN=TOP&gt;
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-make|on-make]]''' - when face is first created to initialize special values
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-click|on-click]]''' - when mouse button clicked on face
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-drag|on-drag]]''' - when dragging inside a face
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-drag-over|on-drag-over]]''' - when dragging and are over a target face
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-drop|on-drop]]''' - when drag has stopped or when a file is dropped
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-focus|on-focus]]''' - when we have been given or are losing focus
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-get|on-get]]''' - to fetch state values
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-set|on-set]]''' - when state values are set
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-clear|on-clear]]''' - when the state values are cleared
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-key|on-key]]''' - when key has been pressed (for our focus)
&lt;/TD&gt;&lt;TD VALIGN=TOP&gt;
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-move|on-move]]''' - when mouse has moved
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-over|on-over]]''' - when mouse passes over or away
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-reset|on-reset]]''' - when reset is needed
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-resize|on-resize]]''' - when size values have changed
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-draw|on-draw]]''' - when system starts to draw the face (create DRAW block)
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-scroll|on-scroll]]''' - when scrolling is needed
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-scroll-event|on-scroll-event]]''' - when the mouse wheel is used
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-init|on-init]]''' - when face and its parent pane are ready (including initial sizing)
*'''[[The Face Object Field - Actors - on-attach|on-attach]]''' - when a face is attached to another face
&lt;/TD&gt;&lt;/TR&gt;&lt;/TABLE&gt;
There is no need to define actors that are not needed.  New actors can be created as required.

Actor functions are called using the DO-STYLE function. For example:

  do-style face 'on-click true

The action is ignored if the face has no on-click actor.