'''This is a private page for early R3 Unicode testers only.'''
This page will be deleted after completion of early test phase.

==Test Distribution==

'''First prototype release:''' 25-Feb-2008

'''Current release:''' core004

Current test distribution contains only the kernel (&quot;core&quot;) of R3.

'''It includes:''' all datatypes, native functions, mezz functions, compression, checksums and hashes, PARSE, help strings, and system object.

'''Not included:''' networking, CGI, graphics, view.

Current Zip download size for R3 is: 141 KB.

Notes:

#'''Scripts must be UTF-8 encoded.'''
#'''You may need to enable the correct fonts for the CMD console.'''
#'''Some internal debug messages may still be printed. You can ignore them.'''

==Areas to Try==

*Console - can you type any char into REBOL as a string or as a word?

*REBOL internals - there are more than 100 different parts of REBOL changed to allow Unicode. So, for example, create a string and try inserting Unicode chars.

*OS command line - e.g. can you pass any file name to REBOL?

*OS function API - things like WHAT-DIR and system/options, do those look correct?

*OS file system API - can you open, read, and write a file using unicoded chars?

==Not Yet Supported==

*Item: UTF-16 formats.
*Plan: Will be supported via refinements.

*Item: IO is binary only. For now, use TO-STRING READ %file.txt
*Plan: Will be supported via refinements.

*Item: Collation/sort and search.
*Plan: We will provide some level of collation and search. But, for full localization, users will need to load special tables.

*Item: Surrogates.
*Plan: no plan at this time.