{{underconstruction}}
'''Note: this document is in the process of being updated. [[User:Carl|Carl]] 13:36, 25 February 2008 (EST)'''

==Basic Concepts==

'''R3 supports Unicode character strings.''' Unicode provides the ability to handle text from all languages, worldwide.

For REBOL 3.0, Unicode is limited mainly to basic operations and does not support the full range of conditions and variations of the Unicode standard. However, what is supported will go far toward helping your programs handle text from around the world.

It's important to know a few basic rules about Unicode, because they may effect your programs. Here is a very short summary to get you started:

#If your code, data, and OS are always ANSI (ASCII 7 bits), then you can ignore most of the special Unicode rules. R3 will keep ANSI strings optimized to conserve memory.
#If any of your code, data, and OS are Latin-1 (ISO-8859-1), then the main thing you need to know is that your files should be UTF8 encoded. All other operations should work as in #1 above.
#If your code and data are ANSI or Latin-1, but your OS runs in Unicode mode, things should also work fine. R3 will use the necessary Unicode interfaces (wide char or UTF8 APIs) to your OS for things like directories and files.
#If your code is ANSI or Latin-1, but your data could include Unicode, there are a small number of rules that you will need to know. Mainly, you should know that that strings in R3 automatically handle Unicode, and when doing file or network transfers, binary data is not equivalent to string data; it must be converted. Also, there can be some details related to search and sort to know. See more below.
#If your code, data, and OS are Unicode, then R3 will handle that. For example, a string is still as string, even if it contains Unicode characters. But, you will need to know the above rule and a few more rules about encodings.
#Finally, if you use a non-Unicode OS, but you use Unicode code or data, the script should still operate correctly; however, your console may display odd characters that are not supported by your OS or console font.

In addition, if you are accustomed to using codepages (upper-half of 8-bit chars) for character encoding, R3 supports those as conversions during read and write, but internal storage does not use codepage techniques. Internally, storage is Unicode, or Latin-1, the low order 8-bit subset of Unicode. Of course, you don't need to know any of that, but it does provide memory optimizations compared to other programming languages.

==Basic Examples==

A few examples will help you quickly understand the general idea of Unicode in REBOL.

Here we use the Greek character alpha (&alpha;), which you can see in this [http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Windows_Programming/Unicode/Character_reference/0000-0FFF> handy Unicode table] is character U+03B1, or 945 as integer. We use this character for the example because it is far beyond the Latin-1 8-bit range.

<pre>
>> #"^(3B1)"     ; char as a hex encoded literal
== #"α"

>> to-char #3b1
== #"α"

>> to-char 945
== #"α"

>> "testα"
== "testα"

>> "test^(3b1)"  ; string containing hex char literal
== "testα"

>> str: append "test" to-char 945
== "testα"

>> length? str
== 5

>> last str
== #"α"

>> to-binary str
== #{74657374CEB1}  ; note, it is UTF-8 encoded!

>> to-string to-binary str  ; to UTF-8 and back again
== "testα"

>> uppercase str
== "TESTΑ"

>> testα: 10
== 10

>> testα
== 10

>> write %testα.txt "example"
== port!

>> read %.
== [%abc.r %testα.txt]
</pre>

Of course, if we use an eastern character, what I see in my console is just a box; no character is rendered because it's not available in the current font. However, if I cut and paste it here:

<pre>
>> #"^(905)"
== #"अ"
</pre>

You will see the character in the browser (if your current browser font supports it). So it's correct value is being preserved, even if it does not display properly.

==EDIT MARKER - OLD STARTS HERE==

Text below not yet updated.

==Source Code Encoding==

'''The default R3 source code encoding is [[UTF-8]].'''

Other encodings such as the popular Latin-1 (ISO-8859-1) are supported, but such encodings must be specified in the script header, as an argument to the LOAD function, or as a command line argument in REBOL.

===Header specification of encoding===

Script headers can specify the encoding of the script. For example:

<pre>
REBOL [
    encoding: latin-1
]
</pre>

{{more}}



===UTF-16 Encoding===

R3 will also support UTF-16 encoding in both big and little endian byte orders.

For loading, the specific UTF-16 encoding will be detected by the presence of a BOM (byte order marker) or by the ordering of the word REBOL as represented in 16 bit characters (note: requires proper starting alignment).

==String Related Datatypes==

REBOL has two primary string datatype classes: '''binary!''' and '''string!''' (including several string related datatypes such as file!, email!, url!, tag!, and issue!).

In R3, when you read a stream of bytes from a file, network, or other device, they are treated as binary. Binary is defined simply as a stream of bytes. These bytes may encode text, images, sounds, video, or other media. In general, you can transfer these bytes to and from memory without knowing how the bytes are encoded.

However, once you need to interpret or manipulate ''what the binary represents'', you must decode the binary into its corresponding datatype. It becomes a string! or an image!, etc.

For text character (string) datatypes, you must know how the binary is encoded in order to decode it into a string that can be processed by REBOL.

By default, R3 assumes that the binary is [[UTF-8]] encoded. So, if you convert a binary to a string, the UTF-8 decoding method will be used. So, in this case:

   str: to string! read %file.txt

The READ returns binary that is assumed to be UTF-8 encoded. The TO function will decode the binary into a unicode string.

Note that UTF-8 perfectly handles the default ASCII (ANSI) characters with values less than 128. That means that most existing REBOL scripts (written in English) will decode properly. They are already in UTF-8 format.

===String Conversions===

Other encodings may be specified for the conversion of binary to string. For example binary encoded as iso8859-2 can also be converted to a string. (Probably by providing TO/with refinement, but yet to be specified.)

{{more}}

==Unicode Test Releases==

===2.99.4 - UTF8 Source Code ===

This release should properly handle UTF8 encoded scripts. This is the new standard (and default) encoding for scripts in R3.

'''Really important notes:'''

*This release '''does not include the Unicode! datatype or any other special unicode handling or APIs'''. It only implements the UTF8 load of scripts.
*This means that words within your code can contain '''any valid unicode characters''', upper and lower case, and the correct word handling should happen.
*If your scripts are ASCII (do not use chars > 127) then they are UTF8 valid, and no changes are needed.
*If your scripts use chars > 127 (e.g. accents, circumflex) then they must be UTF8 encoded. '''Do not try to run scripts that are latin (or any other charset page) encoded.'''
*If your UTF8 script uses a BOM (a 3 byte signature), '''you must strip it prior to loading or doing the script'''.  We plan to handle this automatically, but for now, you must remove it or your script may not load properly. For example: If you are using MS Notepad (and other products) in UTF8 encoding, be aware that the BOM will be prepended to your text.
*Scripts that are UTF16 encoded are not supported in this release, but we plan to handle UTF16 auto-conversion later.

==General Effects of Unicode on REBOL==

Unicode affects the REBOL language in several major ways:

*'''source encoding''' - R3 assumes that source code is UTF8 encoded. This means that REBOL words and quoted strings are also UTF8 encoded by default. If source is UTF16 encoded, it will be converted to UTF8 automatically.
*'''string encoding''' - Strings are assumed to be UTF8 encoded; however, most of the string datatype actions are byte oriented, not character oriented. (We need to think about this more deeply.)
*'''unicode datatype''' - The new UNICODE! datatype supports actions on code-points, providing an easier way to manipulate unicode than dealing with UTF8 encoding.
*'''unicode OS API''' - Calls to various OS API functions must use the native unicode character encoding. For example on Win32, "wide character" functions are supported.
*'''unicode fonts''' - When displaying fonts in R3 graphics, support for unicode characters is needed. This has yet to be defined, and it is likely to be implemented in separate stages.
*'''unicode input''' - User input from various devices requires unicode.

Note that ASCII encoding (chars below 128) is a valid subset of UTF8. If your code only consists of ASCII characters, then everything is the same as in R2. However, if you use characters of 128 or more, they must be UTF8 encoded.

==Detailed Effects of Unicode on REBOL==

Some detailed decisions are required:

*casing rules - most REBOL string ops are case-insensitive.
*comparison - by default do we want to compare code-points (or bytes?)
*other strings types - how are other string datatypes handled (internally)?
*hashing - most of our hash methods are byte-oriented, does that work ok?
*encryption - same question as hashing.
*LOAD conversions - load converts to what internal encoding?
*FORM conversions - forming converts to what external encoding?
*TO-* conversions - for example, to-string! of binary or to-binary! of unicoded string
*alternative encodings - should we find ways to support other char set pages such as latin-1?

==References==

[http://www.unicode.org Unicode home page] - full specification and details

[http://www.jorendorff.com/articles/unicode/index.html Unicode for Programmers] - a nice short summary