{{obsolete}}

Currently various non-organized notes.

== Reference links ==

{{:VID References}}

== FACE object ==

    gob: ; reference to the main gob used to render the face.
    feel: ; object containing the feel functions
          ; they handle events (from user and from app)
          ; they produce events (eg. lower level event can produce higher level one)
          ; they should never change the gobs directly
    look: ; object containing the look functions
          ; they handle the gobs that render the face
       none
    style: 'face ; not sure if useful
    action: none ; action function - receives higher level events
                 ; maybe it should be a block of functions?
                 ; or we can have lower level listeners block and action
                 ; only gets higher level events that are not consumed by listeners
    parent: none ; container face (?)
    pane: [ ] ; contained faces
    size: stretch: shrink: 0x0
    spec: none ; spec object (style arguments)
    attached: [ ] ; list of attached faces - faces that receive action events from this face
    ; other style specific fields

== FEEL object ==

* high granularity (many small functions)
* change face state, then call look functions to update rendering
* functions will most likely get block of events instead of just a single event. more on this soon.

    ; from user
    on-click: func [face event offset] [
        ; click events
        ; event/type one of: up down alt-up alt-down aux-up aux-down (?)
        ; offset within main gob? or should we pass gob and offset?
    ]
    ; on-double-click ??
    on-move: func [face event offset] [
        ; move events
        ; mouse is being moved over one of the face gobs
        ; i think it should probably get it too if mouse was inside and is moved outside
    ]
    ; from app
    on-init: func [face specs] [
        ; initialize face state based on VID specs
    ]
    on-update: func [face new-specs] [
        ; update face data
        ; new-specs is like on-init specs
        ; eg change face text or state etc.
    ]
    ; from other ui elements
    on-action: func [face event] [
        ; event is a block
        ; [word! ...] event/1 is the type of event
        ; common types: [hit] [value &lt;x&gt;] [scroll &lt;offset&gt;]
        ; [scroll-change &lt;offset&gt; &lt;area-size&gt; &lt;visible-size&gt;]
    ]

== LOOK object ==

Render face or update face rendering based on face data/state, or events from other faces

    ; from app
    on-init: func [face specs] [
        ; initialize (render gobs for the first time)
        ; size usually unknown at this time, will get resize later
        ; must set face/size, face/shrink and face/stretch appropriately
    ]
    ; from feel or apps
    on-update: func [face new-specs] [
        ; face state changed, or new specs (new-specs can be none)
        ; may call on-child-resize on parent if size, shrink or stretch changed
        ; parent will call on-resize if necessary
    ]
    on-resize: func [face size] [
        ; face size changed
        ; should try to be as fast as possible
    ]
    ; from other UI code
    on-scroll: func [face offset] [
        ; scroll by offset
        ; eg scroll event from a scroller
    ]
    on-child-resize: func [face min-size max-size] [
        ; for container styles
        ; one of the contained faces' size,shrink,stretch changed (after an update - eg new label text)
        ; may send same event to parent
    ]
    ; etc - need to think about this. maybe just one function instead of many.

== Attaching faces ==

Face can be attached to another face; doing that means that it will send action events to the attached face. Eg. you can attach a scroller to a scrollable area.

== Drag and drop ==

feel/on-click can return a gob! or a block! with [gob! opt [pair! pair!]]. The returned object will be dragged when mouse is moved. If two pairs are returned (min-offset and max-offset), the gob is constrained in that area (example: dragging the knob of a slider or scroller); also the gob is assumed to be already shown (ie added to a window etc.), and the system will only change its offset, and send call face/feel/on-drag on the face that was clicked. Dragging ends when on-click returns none (ie on mouse up). If only a gob is returned, it is added to the window gob (but only at the first mouse move - not immediately after the click) and the user can drag it freely (future: will be its own window and be draggable outside of the face's window). While user is dragging, faces under the cursor get face/feel/on-drag-over, which can return a logic! to indicate if it accepts a drop or not (cursor image will change based on this in the future). Dragging ends on any event that would cause on-click to be called; in this case, face/feel/on-drop is called on the face under the mouse at the time of the drop, with gob/data as argument.

== Panels ==

A panel is a container, it holds one face (usually one column table) and may render a box with text around it, add a scrollbar, and so on.

== Groups ==

A group establishes a relationship between faces. It can group panels together to form a tab panel; it can group faces together (eg mutually exclusive radio buttons); or it can just create a table that holds the contained faces. How to best implement all this not decided yet.

== Layout process ==

Layout starts with a one column table. Styles (including groups and panels) are added to it. Then, the table is initialized. The table's on-init will call on-init on all subfaces. It computes the min and max sizes for itself and returns that. So, a size for the layout is determined, and the table's on-resize is called. The table computes the offset and size of each subface and calls on-resize on them.

== Containers ==

Since all the layout is done by the containers, they become important styles. Containers should be able to not only justify their contents, but also left, center or right align them, in both directions.

== Dialect Evaluation ==

Here are a few notes on VID dialect evaluation.

VID, like the draw, text, and effect dialects is keyword driven with position independent, datatype-based argument specification. That is, arguments of different datatypes can appear '''in any order and all arguments are optional'''. This characteristic is important because it removes the requirement that users memorize argument order - a virtual impossibility given the number of styles multiplied by the number of arguments.

The valid keywords for VID span several contexts:

*'''command words''' (like ORIGIN or RETURN)
*'''master style names'''
*'''local style names'''
*'''special keywords''' (like BOLD or CENTER)
*'''normal script variables and paths'''

In addition, style value variables must be handled (set words).

=== Using DELECT ===

One possible way to efficiently parse the VID dialect is to use the DELECT function - the same function that is used to parse draw, text, and effect blocks. However, we will want to make a few small changes to make VID a bit easier to process.

=== Multiple Contexts ===

The general method would be to specify the commands, styles, and keywords to allow DELECT to recognize them and validate their argument values. However, currently DELECT can only handle a single context, so that '''must be expanded to allow multiple contexts'''. This allows us to keep the commands, master styles, and local styles as separate blocks and eliminate a lot of garbage during the the parse.

    delect/multi dialect [commands master-styles local-styles ...]

=== Argument Spec and Map ===

In addition, it would be good to specify arguments by name and allow access by name. This can be done '''either by mapping argument values to an object or by applying a function'''. The former gives us a single &quot;spec&quot; object that we can save, but the latter gives us a direct access method, eliminating the need to use paths to access the values.

For example a keyword entry (here as a style) for the DELECT dialect would become:

&lt;pre&gt;
button: context [
    name: string!
    size: pair!
    width: integer!
    color: tuple!
    alt-color: tuple!
    action: block!
    alt-action: block!
]
&lt;/pre&gt;

After the button style is parsed, the object can be cloned with the argument values mapped as provided.

Or an alternate method would be to use the same syntax as function definitions:

&lt;pre&gt;
button: [
    name [string!]
    size [pair!]
    width [integer!]
    color [tuple!]
    alt-color [tuple!]
    action [block!]
    alt-action [block!]
]
&lt;/pre&gt;

Then call a function (via APPLY) that would accept those arguments.

=== Callback Function ===

And finally, DELECT currently parses the entire dialect and returns a block of blocks, one for each command. However, in the interest of saving memory, it would be possible to '''allow DELECT to evaluate a callback function for each command/style'''. The advantage here is that the argument block can be reused each time (just as it is in the native draw, text, and effect dialects).

== Do not forget... ==

* Accessibility
* Disabled state
* Keyboard
* Tooltips
* Data validation and constraints

== We need... ==

* window options (eg min-size)

== Open questions ==

=== 1) Should face/gob be allowed to be a block of gobs? ===

It can have a gob/pane of gobs, but it is not a block of gobs. [[User:Carl|Carl]] 15:03, 28 June 2007 (EDT)

The reason is, if the &quot;main&quot; gob is completely transparent and is just used to hold the subgobs, would it not be better to NOT adding it to the hierarchy? [[User:Gabriele|Gabriele]] 14:59, 28 June 2007 (EDT)

Is there such a case of a collection of that type? Do you mean like a text box with scroll bar as an example? Perhaps. For me, the one that comes to mind is a panel or group, but you still want it in the hierarchy so it can be handled as a group. [[User:Carl|Carl]] 16:07, 28 June 2007 (EDT)

A simple example could be even a radio or check button with label (like R2 check-line) - you might have just two gobs (one that renders the button plus one that renders the text) for example (i know this could probably be done with draw on a single gob, but let's pretend that's not the case :), and the &quot;container&quot; gob would then just be a container. Maybe this can always be avoided in practice by having the main gob do something useful, so I don't know, it just seems something to keep in mind. [[User:Gabriele|Gabriele]] 03:11, 29 June 2007 (EDT)

Having one main gob that holds sub-gobs for a style make it easier to render 'disabled' or 'selected' state of that style. --[[User:Rebolek|rebolek]] 04:53, 29 June 2007 (EDT)

Rebolek, that is not necessarily true. First of all, such kind of rendering is to be handled by the look object, that will know every details of the gobs, and may be able to do any optimization - external code should never care about what's inside face/gob. [[User:Gabriele|Gabriele]] 16:08, 29 June 2007 (EDT)

Yes Gabriele, I'm not talking about external code - it would be easier for the look object when for example setting the disabled look to apply effect let say [luma -50 blur] on main gob than on every gob. Also you need to call SHOW on one gob instead a block of gobs (which may be faster, but I'm not sure on that). It will make style coding a bit easier I think. --[[User:Rebolek|rebolek]] 12:49, 2 July 2007 (EDT)

Except that if the main gob is already is use you can't set an /effect for it, and even if it's not in use I don't think /effect would apply to contained gobs. So, there is no much difference. It's possible that the block of gobs is not necessary because the main gob can always be used to something, but I don't know yet. [[User:Gabriele|Gabriele]] 15:52, 2 July 2007 (EDT)

=== 2) Panel is a style, while group seems more like a dialect command. What do you think? ===

It is quite possible. As you implement it, you will be able to tell if that is true. The advantage of it being a style is that it can be accessed and operated on like a style. For instance: moved, scrolled, disabled, &quot;get-contents&quot;, etc. [[User:Carl|Carl]] 15:04, 28 June 2007 (EDT)

Agreed - I'd say it's a command that generates a style, but the generated style changes with context. I'm still not sure if there are cases where an actual face should not be generated. [[User:Gabriele|Gabriele]] 14:59, 28 June 2007 (EDT)

Ah, now I understand your point. I always considered that it would create panel, not just change the layout. So, it would always be a face. - [[User:Carl|Carl]] 16:03, 28 June 2007 (EDT)

=== 3) What happens if you put something that is not a panel in a tabbed group? ===

A good question. It can give an error, or in some cases there may be another use. But, perhaps we can ask that question of any group, such as radio buttons: what if there is a field in there too? Seems ok? [[User:Carl|Carl]] 15:07, 28 June 2007 (EDT)

I think field in radio group would be ok (basically field gets ignored, or more specifically, it would ignore the events coming from the radio buttons). Not sure what should happen if there are other mutually-exclusive styles though. We may need to see what happens in practice... [[User:Gabriele|Gabriele]] 15:15, 28 June 2007 (EDT)

It seems useful to allow it. For example, you can have radio &quot;A&quot; and radio &quot;B&quot; then some text (or even a field or image), then radio &quot;C&quot;.  For example, the text may just be additional comments on the option. [[User:Carl|Carl]] 15:56, 28 June 2007 (EDT)

===4) Dynamic resizing of all styles?===

The layout method allows it to be dynamic as well, correct? So if someone resizes a window or inner panel, the styles know what to do? [[User:Carl|Carl]] 15:04, 28 June 2007 (EDT)

Exactly - the same process happens during resize, except all the initialization has been done already so it should be much faster. Basically layout of content is delegated to container, so you can have different kinds of containers that work in different ways. (This is the way MUI etc. work, it is the &quot;traditional&quot; way of doing GUIs ;) [[User:Gabriele|Gabriele]] 15:15, 28 June 2007 (EDT)

Yes, but it is a bit tricky to determine priorities. For example, I might have a list that says it is 50% wide next to something that has no specified size. Anyway, I assume we can get this all figured out, as did MUI and so many others over the years. (Remember Sun &quot;News&quot; GUI? From Gosling. Now there was a spec. ;) [[User:Carl|Carl]] 15:59, 28 June 2007 (EDT)

Normally, it should be the container to determine the sizes, not the faces; the faces only determine how much they can stretch and shrink. (A model that may be interesting to use, instead of the &quot;traditional&quot; one, would be the one used by TeX of size, shrink and stretch. It is very flexible.) So, the 50% would be a weight not a size - how much does the face shrink or stretch when the container shrinks or stretches. [[User:Gabriele|Gabriele]] 03:16, 29 June 2007 (EDT)

=== 5) Do we want a face/spec object? ===

To answer, let me define it this way: the face/spec would hold the attributes provided by the user to specify the look and feel of the face.

Generally, the spec is static and is not needed once the interface has been created. But, there are two reasons to keep the spec:

#Reflection - to be able to output the spec, in terms of a layout. This is useful for GUI building tools, but for most app GUI's it is not important information.
#Errors - to be able to generate a meaningful error message. The main thing: the error may want to refer to the name of the style. If we can do that some other way, then keeping the rest of the spec may not contribute that much to error messages.

Those are my current thoughts on the question. [[User:Carl|Carl]] 11:51, 9 July 2007 (EDT)

=== 6) (Related to previous one) How do we handle specs? ===

DELECT will handle arguments by datatype (mainly). For different styles, they may be mapped to different things; how do we refer to them? DELECT will give us a block, and we could refer to them by position; however, this means that we need to change the code whenever we decide to change those positions for any reason. If we make an object out of the argument block, so that we refer to them by name, what names do we use? Something like specs/first-tuple, specs/second-tuple and so on? specs/color1, specs/color2? specs/first-block etc. or specs/action, specs/alt-action etc? For panels, specs/action would actually be the contents of the panel, so it would be confusing... I'm still not sure how to make this work well. [[User:Gabriele|Gabriele]] 03:09, 2 July 2007 (EDT)

I can never give a perfect answer, because I find the perfect answer during the coding process. However, what we use for the graphics engine in R3 is to refer to the args by position, but as you point out, it is unfriendly at higher levels. A better method would be to map it quickly to an intermediate object by using SET (eliminating normal object creation overhead). Then, what you must maintain is the 1to1 map between the DELECT and the object words. (Of course, you are right that the names may vary, such as action word above.) You could even make an object that is the definition that creates the DELECT block and the object name block. That would be a good method I think. And of course, the other approach may be to modify DELECT to collect the same datatypes into blocks.  So, you would have all the INTEGERS, TUPLES, PAIRS, etc. We would need to think more about how to best do that to avoid a lot of GC. [[User:Carl|Carl]] 12:13, 9 July 2007 (EDT)

So, after some chat on AltME, a possible solution is (also answers previous question):

    text-style/spec: [
        text: string!
        color: tuple!
        color-back: tuple!
        text-rich: block!
        action: block!
        ; ...
    ]
    delect-object: context [
        ; ...
        text: get text-style/spec
        ; ...
    ]
    ; ...
    ; result from DELECT
    set style/spec next delect-block
    ; ...

-[[User:Gabriele|Gabriele]] 01:36, 10 July 2007 (EDT)

=== 7) Do we want to use the size, shrink, stretch model for resizing? ===

This is an interesting model used by TeX when doing justification. Applied to faces, it would be like this: a face has a &quot;normal&quot; size, that is considered the &quot;best&quot; size for that face. Then, it has an amount of &quot;shrinkability&quot; - how much smaller than that it can get. If size is 100 and shrink is 10, then it can go as low as 90, but not lower. Then, it has an amount of &quot;stretchability&quot; - how fast it can grow in size; the difference with the shrinkability is that stretchability is not limited: if size is 100 and stretch is 10, it can still go to 120. Faces with higher stretch grow faster than faces with lower stretch. TeX also introduce &quot;infinite&quot; stretchability, that is the ability of a face to take over all the space so that the other faces do not stretch at all. TeX has actually four levels of infinity, so that a higher level infinity takes over all the space of lower level infinities. At the same level they share the space. The computation for the resizing would be as follows:

    ; assume face/size, face/shrink, and face/stretch
    ; assume a sum-of function that is basically a foreach that does a sum,
    ; just to avoid cluttering the example
    ; let's pretend we are working on one axis only (which is mostly true in practice)
    container/size: sum-of face container/pane [face/size]
    container/shrink: sum-of face container/pane [face/shrink]
    container/stretch: sum-of face container/pane [face/stretch]
    ; note, they don't need to be recomputed at each resize unless they change (update event)
    either container/size &gt; available-size [
        ; must shrink
        ratio: available-size - container/size / container/shrink
        ; ratio should never be &lt; -1. we assume available-size has been constrained already
        ; by the container's shrinkability
        foreach face container/pane [face/actual-size: face/shrink * ratio + face/size]
    ] [
        ; must stretch
        ratio: available-size - container/size / container/stretch
        ; ratio can be &gt; 1
        foreach face container/pane [face/actual-size: face/stretch * ratio + face/size]
    ]

I will make an example of how to handle infinity levels if you are interested (it gets a bit more complicated, but not much). [[User:Gabriele|Gabriele]] 03:35, 29 June 2007 (EDT)

The metric is: will average web-page authors be able to understand it? They know how HTML tables work - so if we can be close to that model (but more powerful), the more they will understand it. I want to be sure that most people can use VID. So, the best way to make decisions like this: we must write some examples and try it out. We will quickly draw conclusions and go from there. [[User:Carl|Carl]] 14:19, 9 July 2007 (EDT)

=== 8) Do we want faces to have their own margins and padding? ===

After doing proto 1, I think it's probably a good idea to have at least per-face margins. Padding is probably not necessary (any padding can be done by the look object and does not influence the layout process). One big reason is that when you have a scrollable area and a scroller you usually don't want any space between them. What do you think? [[User:Gabriele|Gabriele]] 03:36, 16 July 2007 (EDT)

=== 9) Do we want a &quot;spacer&quot; style that just eats space? ===

It probably does not need to be accessible as a face by users (although there may be uses for it...), mainly a way for the container to remember when resizing something like PAD command has been used in the dialect. But we can also make it a real style, then PAD command (etc) is not necessary anymore. [[User:Gabriele|Gabriele]] 04:14, 29 June 2007 (EDT)

That may be fine, especially if faces are efficient and minimized for such cases. [[User:Carl|Carl]] 14:22, 9 July 2007 (EDT)

=== 10) How to call &quot;spacer&quot; styles? ===

In the current implementation, we have three different spacer styles: skip, space and filler. skip just skips the current cell, and it does not take space. space takes a small space and. filler is greedy and takes as much space as possible (not too much in the current implementation - we can change that), normally used to push things to the left or to the right and so on. [[User:Gabriele|Gabriele]] 14:28, 14 July 2007 (EDT)